To Dr. Thomas Wharton Wd at N: W. clouds&amp; sunshine.
a mile&amp; ½ from Brough on a hill lay a great army encamped.
to the left opened a fine valley with green meadows&amp; hedge-rows, a Gentleman's house peeping forth from a grove of old trees.
on a nearer approach appeared myriads of horses&amp; cattle in the road itself&amp; in all the fields round me, a brisk stream hurrying cross the way, thousands of clean healthy People in their best party-colored apparel, Farmers&amp; their families, Esquires&amp; their daughters, hastening up from the dales&amp; down the fells on every side, glittering in the sun&amp; pressing forward to join the throng: while the dark hills, on many of whose tops the mists were yet hanging, served as a contrast to this gay&amp; moving scene, which continued for near two miles more along the road, and the crowd( coming towards it) reached on as far Appleby.
On the ascent of the hill above Appleby the thick hanging wood&amp; the long reaches of the Eden( rapid, clear&amp; full as ever) winding below with views of the Castle&amp; Town gave much employment to the mirror: but the sun was wanting&amp; the sky overcast.
oats&amp; barley cut every where, but not carried in.
passed Kirby Thore, Sr W: Dalston' s house at Acorn Bank, Whinfield Park, Hawthorn Oaks, Countess Pillar, Brougham Castle, Mr Brown( one of y six Clerks) his large new house??
, crossed the Eden&amp; the Eimot( pronounce Eeman) with its green vale,&amp; at 3 o'clock dined with Mrs Buchanan, at Penrith on trout&amp; partridge.
in the afternoon walked up the Beacon Hill a mile to the top, saw Whinfield and Lowther Parks,&amp; through an opening in the bosom of that cluster of mountains, which the Doctor well remembers, the Lake of Ulz Water, with the craggy tops of a hundred nameless hills.
these to W:&amp; s., to the N: a great extent of black&amp; dreary plains, to E: Cross Fell just visible through mists&amp; vapours hovering round it.
Oct: I. Wd at s: W: a grey autumnal day, air perfectly calm&amp; gentle.
went to see Ulz Water 5 miles distant.
soon left the Keswick Road&amp; turned to the left through shady lanes along the Vale of Eeman, which runs rapidly on near the way, ripling over the stones.
to the right is Delmaine, a large fabrick of pale red stone with 9 windows in front&amp; 7 on the side built by Mr Hassell, behind it a fine lawn surrounded by woods&amp; a long rocky eminence rising over them.
a clear&amp; brisk rivulet runs by the house to join the Eeman, whose course is in sight&amp; at a small distance.
Farther on appears Hatton St John, a castle-like old mansion of Mr Huddleston.
approached Dunmallert, a fine pointed hill covered with wood planted by old Mr Hassle beforementioned, who lives always at home&amp; delights in planting.
walked over a spungy meadow or two&amp; began to mount this hill through a broad&amp; strait green alley among the trees,&amp; with some toil gained the summit.
from hence saw the Lake opening directly at my feet majestic in its calmness, clear&amp; smooth as a blew mirror with winding shores&amp; low points of land covered with green inclosures, white farm-houses looking out among the trees,&amp; cattle feeding.
the water is almost every where bordered with cultivated lands gently sloping upwards till they reach the feet of the mountains, which rise very rude&amp; aweful with their broken tops on either hand.
directly in front at better than 3 mile's distance, Place Fell, one of the bravest among them, pushes its bold broad breast into the midst of the Lake&amp; forces it to alter it's course, forming first a large bay to the left&amp; then bending to the right.
I descended Dunmallert again by a side avenue, that was only not perpendicular,&amp; came to Barton Bridge over the Eeman, then walking through a path in the wood round the bottom of the hill came forth, where the Eeman issues out of the lake,&amp; continued my way along it's western shore close to the water,&amp; generally on a level with it.
Saw a cormorant flying over it&amp; fishing.
.
.
The figure of Ulz Water[??]
shore nothing resembles that laid down in our maps: it is 9 miles long,&amp;( at widest) under a mile in breadth.
after extending itself 3m:&amp; ½ in a line to s: W: it turns at the foot of Place Fell, almost due West, and is here not twice the breadth of the Thames at London.
it is soon again interrupted by the roots of Helvellyn, a lofty&amp; very rugged mountain,&amp; spreading again turns off to s: E:.
&amp; is lost among the deep recesses of the hills.
to this second turning I pursued my way about four miles along its borders beyond a village scattered among trees&amp; calleed Water Malloch, in a pleasant grave day, perfectly calm&amp; warm, but without a gleam of sunshine: then the sky seeming to thicken, the valley to grow more desolate,&amp; evening drawing on, I returned by the way I came to Penrith.
Oct: 2.
Wd at s: E:, sky clearing, Cross Fell misty, but the outline of the other hills very distinct.
set out at 10 for Keswick, by the road we went in 1767. saw Greystock - town&amp; castle to the right, which lie only 3 miles( over the Fells) from Ulz Water.
passed through Penradock&amp; Threlcot at the feet of Saddleback, whose furrowed sides were gilt by the noon-day Sun, while its brow appeared of a sad purple from the shadow of the clouds, as they sailed slowly by it.
the broad&amp; green valley of Gardies and Low Side, with a swift stream glittering among the cottages&amp; meadows to the left;&amp; the much finer( but narrower) valley of St John's opening into it: Hill Top the large, though low, mansion of the Gaskarths, now a Farm House, seated on an eminence among woods under a steep fell, was what appeared the most conspicuous,&amp; beside it a great rock like some antient tower nodding to its fall.
passed by the side of Skiddaw&amp; its cub called Latter Rig,&amp; saw from an eminence at two miles distance the Vale of Elysium in all its verdure, the sun then playing on the bosom of the lake,&amp; lighting up all the mountains with its lustre.
Dined by two o'clock at the Queen's Head,&amp; then straggled out alone to the Parsonage, fell down on my back across a dirty lane with my glass open in one hand, but broke only my knuckles: stayed nevertheless,&amp; saw the sun set in all its glory.
Oct: 3.
Wd at s: E:, a heavenly day.
rose at seven,&amp; walked out under the conduct of my Landlord to Borrodale the grass was covered with a hoar-frost, which soon melted,&amp; exhaled in a thin blewish smoke.
crossed the meadows obliquely, catching a diversity of views among the hills over the lake&amp; islands,&amp; changing prospect at every ten paces, left Cockshut&amp; Castle Hill( which we formerly mounted) behind me,&amp; drew near the foot of Walla Crag, whose bare&amp; rocky brow, cut perpendicularly down above 400 feet, as I guess, awefully overlooks the way: our path here tends to the left,&amp; the ground gently rising,&amp; covered with a glade of scattering trees&amp; bushes on the very margin of the water, opens both ways the most delcious view, that my eyes ever beheld.
Behind you are the magnificent heights of Walla - crag; opposite lie the thick hanging woods of Lord Egremont,&amp; Newland - valley with green&amp; smiling fields embosomed in the dark cliffs; to the left the jaws of Borodale, with that turbulent Chaos of mountain behind mountain rolled in confusion; beneath you,&amp; stretching far away to the right, the shining purity of the Lake, just ruffled by the breeze enough to shew it is alive, reflecting rocks, woods, fields,&amp; inverted tops of mountains, with the white buildings of Keswick, Crosthwait - church,&amp; Skiddaw for a back-ground at a distance.
oh Doctor!
I never wished more for you;&amp; pray think, how the glass played its part in such a spot, which is called Carf Close-reeds: I chuse to set down these barbarous names, that any body may enquire on the place,&amp; easily find the particular station, that I mean.
This scene continues to Barrow Gate,&amp; a little farther, passing a brook called Barrow Beck, we entered Borodale.
the crags, named Lodoor Banks now begin to impend terribly over your way;&amp; more terribly, when you hear, that three years since an immense mass of rock tumbled at once from the brow,&amp; bared all access to the dale( for this is the only road) till they could work their way through it.
luckily no one was passing at the time of this fall; but down the side of the mountain&amp; far into the lake lie dispersed the huge fragments of this ruin in all shapes&amp; in all directions.
Something farther we turned aside into a coppice, ascending a little in front of Lodoor water-fall.
the height appears to be about 200 feet, the quantity of water not great, though( these three days excepted) it had rained daily in the hills for near two months before: but then the stream was nobly broken, leaping from rock to rock,&amp; foaming with fury.
on one side a towering crag, that spired up to equal, if not overtop, the neighbouring cliffs( this lay all in shade&amp; darkness on the other hand a rounder broader projecting hill shaged with wood&amp; illumined by the sun, which glanced sideways on the upper part of the cataract.
the force of the water wearing a deep channel in the ground hurries away to join the lake.
we descended again,&amp; passed the stream over a rude bridge, soon after we came under Gowder Crag, a hill more formidable to the eye&amp; to the apprehension than that of Lodoor; the rocks atop, deep-cloven perpendicularly by the rains, hanging loose&amp; nodding forwards, seem just starting from their base in shivers: the whole way down&amp; the road on both sides is strewed with piles of the fragments strangely thrown across each other&amp; of a dreadful bulk.
the place reminds one of those passes in the Alps, where the Guides tell you to move on with speed,&amp; say nothing, lest the agitation of the air should loosen the snows above,&amp; bring down a mass that would overwhelm a caravan.
I took their counsel here and hastened on in silence.
Oct: 3.
The hills here are clothed all up their steep sides with oak, ash, birch, holly&amp; c: some of it has been cut 40 years ago, some within these 8 years, yet all is sprung again green, flourishing,&amp; tall for its age, in a place where no soil appears but the staring rock,&amp; where a man could scarce stand upright.
Met a civil young Farmer overseeing his reapers( for it is oat-harvest here) who conducted us to a neat white house in the village of Grange, which is built on a rising ground in the midst of a valley.
round it the mountains form an aweful ampitheatre,&amp; through it obliquely runs the Darwent clear as glass,&amp; shewing under it's bridge every trout that passes.
beside the village rises a round eminence of rock covered entirely with old trees,&amp; over that more proudly towers Castle Crag, invested also with wood on its sides,&amp; bearing on its naked top some traces of a fort said to be Roman.
By the side of this hill, the valley turns to the left&amp; contracts its dimensions, till there is hardly any road but the rocky bed of the river.
the wood of the mountains increases&amp; their summits grow loftier to the eye,&amp; of more fantastic forms: among them appear Eagle's - cliff, Dove's - nest, Whitedale Pike,&amp; c: celebrated names in the annals of Keswick.
the dale opens about four miles higher till you come to Sea Whaite( where lies the way mounting the hills to the right, that leads to the Wadd Mines) all farther access is here barred to prying Mortals, only there is a little path winding over the Fells,&amp; for some weeks in the year passable to the Dale's - men; but the Mountains know well, that these innocent people will not reveal the mysteries of their ancient kingdom, the reign of Chaos&amp; old Night.
only I learned, that this dreadful road dividing again leads one branch to Ravenglass,&amp; the other to Hawkshead.
For me I went no farther than the Farmer's( better than 4m: from Keswick) at Grange: his Mother&amp; he brought us butter, that Siserah would have jumped at, though not in a lordly dish, bowls of milk, thin oaten-cakes,&amp; ale;&amp; we had carried a cold tongue thither with us.
our Farmer was himself the Man, that last year plundered the Eagle's eirie: all the dale are up in arms on such an occasion, for they lose abundance of lambs yearly, not to mention hares, partridge, grous,&amp; c: he was let down from the cliff in ropes to the shelf of rock, on which the nest was built, the people above shouting&amp; hollowing to fright the old birds, which flew screaming round, but did not dare to attack him.
he brought off the eaglet( for there is rarely more than one)&amp; an addle egg.
the nest was roundish&amp; more than a yard over, made of twigs twisted together.
seldom a year passes but they take the brood or eggs,&amp; sometimes they shoot one, sometimes the other Parent, but the surviver has always found a mate( probably in Ireland)&amp; they breed near the old place.
by his description I learn, that this species is the Erne( the Vultur Albicilla of Linnaeus in his last edition, but in yours Falco Albicilla) so consult Pennant about it.
Walked leisurely home the way we came, but saw a new landscape: the features indeed were the same in part, but many new ones were disclosed by the mid-day Sun,&amp; the tints were entirely changed.
take notice this was the best or perhaps the one day for going up Skiddaw, but I thought it better employed: it was perfectly serene,&amp; hot as midsummer.
In the evening walked alone down to the Lake by the side of Crow Park after sunset&amp; saw the solemn colouring of night draw on, the last gleam of sunshine fading away on the hill-tops, the deep serene of the waters,&amp; the long shadows of the mountains thrown across them, till they nearly touched the hithermost shore.
at distance heard the murmur of many waterfalls not audible in the day-time.
wished for the Moon, but she was dark to me&amp; silent, hid in her vacant interlunar cave.
Oct: 4.
Wd E:, clouds&amp; sunshine,&amp; in the course of the day a few drops of rain.
Walked to Crow Park, now a rough pasture once a glade of ancient oaks, whose large roots still remain on the ground, but nothing has sprung from them.
if one single tree had remained, this would have been an unparalleled spot,&amp; Smith judged right, when he took his print of the Lake hence, for it is a gentle eminence, not too high, on the very margin of the water&amp; commanding it from end to end, looking full into the gorge of Borodale.
I prefer it even to Cockshut Hill, which lies beside it,&amp; to which I walked in the afternoon: it is covered with young trees both sown&amp; planted, oak, spruce, scotch-fir,&amp; c: all which thrive wonderfully.
there is an easy ascent to the top,&amp; the view far preferable to that on Castle Hill( which you remember) because this is lower&amp; nearer to the Lake: for I find all points, that are much elevated, spoil the beauty of the valley,&amp; make its parts( which are not large) look poor&amp; diminutive.
while I was here, a little shower fell, red clouds came marching up the hills from the east,&amp; part of a bright rainbow seemed to rise along the side of Castle Hill.
From hence I got to the Parsonage a little before Sunset,&amp; saw in my glass a picture, that if I could transmitt to you,&amp; fix it in all the softness of its living colours, would fairly sell for a thousand pounds.
this is the sweetest scene I can yet discover in point of pastoral beauty.
the rest are in a sublimer style.
Oct: 5.
Wd N: E: Clouds&amp; sunshine.
Walked through the meadows&amp; corn-fields to the Derwent&amp; crossing it went up How Hill.
it looks along Bassinthwaite Water&amp; sees at the same time the course of the river&amp; a part of the Upper Lake with a full view of Skiddaw.
then I took my way through Portingskall village to the Park, a hill so called covered entirely with wood: it is all a mass of crumbling slate.
passed round its foot between the trees&amp; the edge of the water,&amp; came to a Peninsula that juts out into the lake&amp; looks along it both ways.
in front rises Walla Crag,&amp; Castle Hill, the Town, the road to Penrith, Skiddaw&amp; Saddleback.
returning met a brisk and cold N: Eastern blast, that ruffled all the surface of the lake and made it rise in little waves that broke at the foot of the wood.
After dinner walked up the Penrith - road 2 miles or more&amp; turning into a corn-field to the right, called Castle Rigg, saw a Druid Circle of large stones 108 feet in diameter, the biggest not 8 feet high, but most of them still erect: they are 50 in number.
the valley of St John appeared in sight,&amp; the summits of Catchidecam( called by Camden, Casticand)&amp; Helvellyn, said to be as high as Skiddaw,&amp; to rise from a much higher base.
a shower came on,&amp; I returned.
Oct: 6.
Wd E: Clouds&amp; sun.
went in a chaise along the east-side of Bassingth: Water to Ouse Bridge( pronounce Ews Bridge) the road in some part made&amp; very good, the rest slippery&amp; dangerous cart-road, or narrow rugged lanes but no precipices: it runs directly along the foot of Skiddaw.
opposite to Widhope Brows( clothed to the top with wood) a very beautiful view opens down the Lake, which is narrower&amp; longer than that of Keswick, less broken into bays&amp; without islands.
at the foot of it a few paces from the brink gently sloping upward stands Armathwate in a thick grove of Scotch firs, commanding a noble view directly up the lake.
at a small distance behind the house is a large extent of wood,&amp; still behind this a ridge of cultivated hills, on which( according to the Keswick - proverb) the Sun always shines.
the inhabitants here on the contrary call the vale of Derwent Water the Devil's Chamber Pot,&amp; pronounce the name of Skiddaw Fell( which terminates here) with a sort of terror&amp; aversion.
Armathwate House is a modern fabrick, not large,&amp; built of dark-red stone, belonging to Mr Spedding, whose Gr: father was Steward to old Sir James Lowther,&amp; bought this estate of the Himers.
so you must look for Mr Michell in some other country.
the sky was overcast&amp; the wind cool, so after dining at a publick house, which stands here near the bridge( that crosses the Derwent just where it issues from the lake)&amp; sauntering a little by the water-side I came home again.
the turnpike is finished from Cockermouth hither( 5 miles)&amp; is carrying on to Penrith.
several little showers to-day.
A Man came in, who said there was snow on Cross Fell this morning.
Oct: 7.
Market Day here.
Wind N: E: Clouds&amp; Sunshine.
little showers at intervals all day.
yet walked in the morning to Crow Park,&amp; in the evening up Penrith - road.
the clouds came rolling up the mountains all round very[ unpromising]; yet the moon shone at intervals.
it was too damp to go towards the lake.
tomorrow mean to bid farewell to Keswick.
Botany might be studied here to great advantage at another season because of the great variety of soils&amp; elevations all lieing within a small compass.
I observed nothing but several curious Lichens,&amp; plenty of gale or Dutch myrtle perfuming the borders of the lake.
this year the Wadd mine had been opened( which is done once in 5 years) it is taken out in lumps sometimes as big as a man's fist,&amp; will undergo no preparation by fire, not being fusible.
when it is pure soft, black,&amp; close-grained, it is worth sometimes 30 shillings a pound.
there are no Charr ever taken in these lakes, but plenty in Butter Mere-water, which lies a little way N: of Borrodale, about Martlemas, which are potted here.
they sow chiefly oats&amp; bigg here, which are now cutting,&amp; still on the ground.
the rains have done much hurt; yet observe, the soil is so thin&amp; light, that no day has passed in which I could not walk out with ease,&amp; you know, I am no lover of dirt.
Fell Mutton is now in season for about six weeks; it grows on the mountains,&amp; nearly resembles venison: excellent Pike&amp; Perch( here called Bass trout is out of season.
partridge in great plenty.
Receipt to dress Perch( for Mrs Wharton) Wash, but neither scale, nor gut them.
broil till enough; then pull out the fins,&amp; open them along the back, take out the bone&amp; all the inwards without breaking them.
put in a large lump of butter&amp; salt, clap the sides together, till it melts,&amp; serve very hot.
it it excellent.
the skin must not be eaten.
Oct: 8.
Left Keswick&amp; took the Ambleside - road in a gloomy morning.
Wind E:&amp; afterwards N: E:.
about 2m: from the Town mounted an eminence called Castle Rigg,&amp; the sun breaking out discovered the most enchanting view I have yet seen of the whole valley behind me, the two lakes, the river, the mountains all in their glory!
had almost a mind to have gone back again.
the road in some few parts is not compleated, but good country-road through sound, but narrow&amp; stony lanes, very safe in broad day-light.
this is the case about Causeway Foot&amp; among Naddle Fells to Lanewaite.
the vale you go in has little breadth, the mountains are vast&amp; rocky, the fields little&amp; poor,&amp; the inhabitants are now making hay,&amp; see not the sun by two hours in a day so long as at Keswick.
came to the foot of Helvellyn along which runs an excellent road, looking down from a little height on Lees Water( called also Thirl Meer, or Wiborn Water)&amp; soon descending on its margin.
the lake from its depth looks black( though really clear as glass&amp; from the gloom of the vast crags, that scowl over it: it is narrow&amp; about 3 miles long, resembling a river in its course.
little shining torrents hurry down the rocks to join it, with not a bush to overshadow them, or cover their march.
all is rock&amp; loose stones up to the very brow, which lies so near your way, that not half the height of Helvellyn can be seen.
.
Past by the little Chappel of Wiborn, out of which the Sunday Congregation were then issuing.
Past a beck near Dunmail Raise,&amp; entered Westmoreland a second time.
now begin to see Helm Crag distinguished from its rugged neigbours not so much by its height, as by the strange broken outline of its top, like some gigantic building demolished,&amp; the stones that composed it, flung cross each other in wild confusion.
just beyond it opens one of the sweetest landscapes, that art ever attempted to imitate.
( the bosom of the mountains spreading here into a broad bason) discovers in the midst Grasmere Water.
its margin is hollowed into small bays with bold eminences some of rock, some of soft turf, that half conceal, and vary the figure of the little lake they command, from the shore a low promonotory pushes itself far into the water,&amp; on it stands a white village with the parish-church rising in the midst of it, hanging enclosures, corn-fields,&amp; meadows green as an emerald with their trees&amp; hedges&amp; cattle fill up the whole space from the edge of the water&amp; just opposite to you is a large farm-house at the bottom of a steep smooth lawn embosomed in old woods, which climb half way up the mountain's side,&amp; discover above them a broken line of crags, that crown the scene.
not a single red tile, no flaring Gentleman's house, or garden-walls, break in upon the repose of this little unsuspected paradise, but all is peace, rusticity,&amp; happy poverty in its neatest most becoming attire.
The road winds over Grasmere Hill, whose rocks soon conceal the water from your sight, yet it is continued along behind them,&amp; contracting itself to a river communicates with Ridale Water, another small lake, but of inferior size&amp; beauty.
it seems shallow too, for large patches of reeds appear pretty far within it.
into this vale the road descends.
on the opposite banks large&amp; ancient woods mount up the hills,&amp; just to the left of our ways stands Rydale Hall, the family seat of Sir Michael Fleming, but now a farm-house, a large olf-fashioned fabrick surrounded with wood&amp; not much too good for its present destination.
Sir Michael is now on his travels,&amp; all this timber far&amp; wide belongs to him.
I tremble for it, when he returns.
near the house rises a huge crag called Rydale Head, which is said to command a full view of Wynander Mere[ lake],&amp; I doubt it not, for within a mile that great Lake is visible even from the road.
as to going up the crag one might as well go up Skiddaw.
Came to Ambleside, 18m: from Keswick meaning to lie there, but on looking into the best bed-chamber dark&amp; damp as a cellar grew delicate, gave up Winandermere in despair&amp; resolved I would go to Kendal directly, 14 m: farther.
the road in general fine turnpike, but some parts( about 3 m: in all) not made, yet without danger.
Unexpectedly was well-rewarded for my determination.
the afternoon was fine,&amp; the road for full 5 m: runs along the side of Winder Mere[ eastern shore] with delicious views across it&amp; almost from one end to the other.
it is ten miles in length,&amp; at most a mile over, resembling the course of some vast&amp; magnificent river, but no flat marshy grounds, no osier-beds, or patches of scrubby plantation on its banks.
at the head of two vallies open among the mountains, one that by which we came down, the other Langsledale, in which Wreenose&amp; Hard Knot, two great mountains, rise above the rest.
from thence the fells visibly sink&amp; soften along its sides, sometimes they run into it( but with a gentle declivity) in their own dark&amp; natural complexion, oftener they are green&amp; cultivated with farms interspersed&amp; round eminences on the border covered with trees: towards the South it seemed to break into larger bays with several islands&amp; a wider extent of cultivation.
the way rises continually till at a place called Orrest Head it turns to s: E: losing sight of the water.
Passed by Ings Chappel,&amp; Staveley, but I can say no farther, for the dusk of evening coming on I entered Kendal almost in the dark,&amp; could distinguish only a shadow of the Castle on a hill,&amp; tenter-grounds spread far&amp; wide round the Town, which I mistook for houses.
My inn promised sadly having two wooden galleries( like Scotland) in front of it.
It was indeed an old ill-contrived house, but kept by civil sensible people, so I stayed two nights with them&amp; fared&amp; slept very comfortably.
Oct: 9.
Wind N: W: clouds&amp; sun.
air mild as summer.
all corn off the ground, sky-larks singing aloud( by the way I saw not one at Keswick, perhaps because the place abounds in birds of prey).
went up the Castle Hill.
the Town consists chiefly of three nearly parallel streets almost a mile long.
except these all the other houses seem as if they had been dancing a country-dance&amp; were out: there they stand back to back, corner to corner, some up hill, some down without intent or meaning.
along by their side runs a fine brisk stream, over which are 3 stone-bridges.
the buildings( a few comfortable houses excepted) are mean, of stone&amp; covered with a bad rough-cast.
near the end of the Town stands a handsome house of Col: Wilson's,&amp; adjoining it the Church, a very large Gothick fabrick with a square Tower.
it has no particular ornaments but double isles,&amp; at the east-end 4 chappels, or choirs.
one of the Pars, another of the Stricklands, the 3rd is the proper choir of the church,&amp; the 4th of the Bellingcams, a family now extinct.
There is an alter-tomb of one of them dated 1577 with a flat brass, arms&amp; quarterings.
&amp; in the window their arms alone, Arg: a hunting-horn, sab: strung Gules.
in the Strickland's chappel several modern monuments,&amp; another old altar-tomb, not belonging to the family: on the side of it, a Fess dancetty between 10 Billets( Deincourt?)
in the Parr - chappel is a third altar-tomb in the corner, no fig: or inscription, but on the side cut in stone an escutcheon of Roos of Kendal( 3 Water Budgets) quartering Parr( 2 bars in bordure engrailed).
secondly an eschutcheon, Vaire, a Fess( for Marmion).
thirdly.
an escutcheon.
three Chevronels braced&amp; a Chief( which I take for Fitzhugh) at the foot is an escutcheon surrounded with the Garter, bearing Roos&amp; Parr quarterly, quartering the other two beforementioned.
I have no books to look in, therefore can not say, whether this is the Lord Parr of Kendal( Queen Catharine' s Father) or her Brother, the Marquis of Northampton.
it is a Cenotaph for the latter, who was buried at Warwick in 1571.
The remains of the Castle are seated on a fine hill on the side of the river opposite to the Town.
almost the whole enclosure of walls remains with 4 towers, 2 square&amp; 2 or 3 round, but their upper part&amp; embattlements are demolished.
it is of rough stone&amp; cement, without any ornament or arms, round enclosing a court of like form&amp; surrounded by a mote, nor ever could have been larger than it is, for there are no traces of outworks.
there is a good view of the town&amp; river with a fertile open valley, thro which it winds.
After dinner went along the Milthrop - turnpike 4 m: to see the falls( or force) of the River Kent.
came to Siserge( pronounce Siser)&amp; turned down a lane to the left: Siser, the seat of the Stricklands an old Catholick family, is an an ancient Hall House, with a very large tower embattled: the rest of the buildings added to this are of later date, but all is white&amp; seen to advantage on a back ground of old trees: there is a small park also well-wooded.
opposite to this turned to the left&amp; soon came to the river.
it works its way in a narrow&amp; deep rocky channel overhung with trees.
the calmness&amp; brightness of the evening, the roar of the waters,&amp; the thumping of huge hammers ar an iron-forge not far distant make it a singular walk, but as to the falls( for there are two) they are not 4 feet high.
I went on down to the forge&amp; saw the Daemons at work by the light of their own fires: the iron is brought in pigs to Milthrop by sea from Scotland&amp; c. &amp; is here beat into bars&amp; plates.
two miles farther at Levens is the seat of Lord Suffolk, where he sometimes passes the summer.
it was a favourite place of his late Countess: but this I did not see.
Oct: 10. went by Burton to Lancaster Wind N: W: clouds&amp; sun.
22m: very good country well enclosed&amp; wooded with some common interspersed.
passed at the foot of Farlton Knot, a high fell.
4 m: N: of Lancaster on a rising ground calld' Bolton( pron: Bouton) - Wait had a full view of Cartmell Sands with here and there a Passenger riding over them( it being low water) the points of Furness shooting far into the sea,&amp; lofty mountains partly covered with clouds extending North of them.
Lancaster also appeared very conspicuous&amp; fine, for its most distinguished features the Castle&amp; Church, mounted on a green eminence, were all, that could be seen.
woe is me!
when I got thither, it was the second day of their fair.
the Inn( in the principal street was a great old gloomy house full of people, but I found tolerable quarters,&amp; even slept two nights in peace.
Ascended the Castle Hill in a fine afternoon.
it takes up the higher top of the eminence on which it stands,&amp; is irregularly round, encompassed with a deep mote.
in front towards the Town is a magnificent Gothick Gateway, lofty&amp; huge, the overhanging battlements are supported by a triple range of corbels, the intervals pierced through&amp; shewing the day from above.
on its top rise light watchtowers of small height.
it opens below with a grand pointed arch: over this is a wrought tabernacle, doubtless once containing the Founders figure, on one side a shield of France semy quartered with England, on the other the same with a label ermine for John of Gant D: of Lancaster.
this opens to a court within, which I did not much care to enter, being the County Gaol&amp; full of Prisoners, both Criminals&amp; Debtors.
from this gateway the walls continue&amp; join it to a vast square tower of great height, the lower part at least of remote antiquity, for it has small round-headed lights with plain short pillars on each side of them, there is a third tower also square&amp; of less dimensions.
this is all the castle, near it&amp; but little lower stands the Church, a large&amp; plain Gothic fabrick, the high square Tower at the West End has been rebuilt of late years, but nearly in the same style.
there are no ornaments of arms,&amp; c: any where to be seen.
within it is lightsome&amp; spacious, but not one monument of antiquity, or piece of painted glass is left.
from the Church Yard there is an extensive sea-view( for now the tide had almost covered the sands,&amp; filled the river)&amp; besides greatest part of Furness I could distinguish Peel Castle on the isle of Fowdrey, which lies off its southern extremity.
the Town is built on the slope&amp; at the feet of the Castle Hill more than twice the bigness of Aukland with many neat buildings of white stone, but a little disorderly in their position ad libitum like Kendal.
many also extend below on the keys by the river-side, where a number of ships were moored, some of them three - mast vessels decked out with their colours in honor of the Fair.
here is a good bridge of 4 arches over the Lune, which runs( when the tide is out) in two streams divided by a bed of gravel, which is not covered but in spring-tides.
below the town it widens to near the breadth of the Thames at London,&amp; meets the sea at 5 or 6 m: distance to s: W: Oct: 11.
Wind s: W: clouds&amp; sun.
warm&amp; a fine dappled sky.
crossed the river&amp; walked over a peninsula 3 miles to the village of Pooton which stands on the beach.
an old Fisherman mending his nets( while I enquired about the danger of passing those sands) told me in his dialect a moving story, how a brother of the trade, a Cockler( as he styled him) driving a little cart with two daughters( women grown) in it,&amp; his Wife on horseback following, set out one day to pass the 7 mile sands, as they had frequently been used to do, for nobody in the village knew them better than the old Man did.
when they were about haf way over, a thick fog rose,&amp; as they advanced, they found the water much deeper than they expected.
the old man was puzzled, he stoped,&amp; said he would go a little way to find some mark he was acquainted with.
they staid a little while for him, but in vain.
they called aloud, but no reply.
at last the young women pressed their mother to think, where they were,&amp; go on.
she would not leave the place, she wandered about forlon&amp; amazed, she would not quit her horse,&amp; get into the cart with them.
they determined after much time wasted to turn back,&amp; give themselves up to the guidance of their horses.
the old Woman was soon washed off and perished.
the poor Girls clung close to their cart,&amp; the horse sometimes wading&amp; sometimes swimming brought them back to land alive, but senseless with terror&amp; distress&amp; unable for many days to give an account of themselves.
the bodies of their parents were found soon after; that of the Father a vert few paces distant from the spot, where he had left them.
In the afternoon wandered about the town&amp; by the key till it grew dark.
a little rain fell.
