A Tour In England And Scotland, In 1785.
By An English Gentleman London: Printed For G. G. J.
And J. Robinson, Pater Noster Row.
1788.
From Ormskirk go in a post chaise to Preston: the country between which places is low and sandy.
This tract affords not any striking prospect; but it is well cultivated, and appears to be good grazing ground.
Preston is a very old town, situated on an eminence, commanding a pleasing prospect all around it, but more particularly from that point from whence you view the seat of Sir Harry Houghton, on the banks of the River Ribble, which winds prettily round the eminence on which it is situated, and the distant hills in the west craven of Yorkshire bound the view.
Tuesday, the 7th of June.
Leave Preston, and go on to Garstang.
The road between these places is exceedingly good; the country well cultivated; much pasture land, but little corn; and no timber, all the trees being cut off by the westerly winds.
Dine at Lancaster, an old and ill built town, and the streets very narrow.
The castle, which is situated on an eminence that commands the town, was built by Agricola; and, though it bears all the marks of antiquity, yet seems to be in a perfect state.
This is now the county jail, which we visited, and were happy to find the prisoners well lodged, and kept clean.
Lancaster has been a place of considerable trade, but seems now on the decline.
The view from the castle is very extensive, but by no means pleasant.
Wednesday, the 8th of June.
Sleep at Hornby.
About three miles from Lancaster, enter the vale of Lonsdale, which is very beautiful.
On the right is a barren ridge of mountains: in the middle runs the River Loon, through rich and fertile meadows; and on the left the hills are covered with hanging wood; the whole forming a most delightful and charming view.
The village of Hornby is small, and the houses are very indifferent.
Near the town is a very old castle, belonging to Mr. Charteris, from whence there is a most beautiful prospect of three rivers, the vale, and distant barren mountains.
The castle is now uninhabited, and falling to ruin.
Leave Hornby, and ride by the side of the River Loon, to Kirby Lonsdale, the most picturesqe, perhaps, and delightful ride in Britain.
Kirby Lonsdale is a neat, well built little town, situated on an eminence; and the River Loon runs close beneath it, through a rich and well cultivatd vale.
The adjacent and lower hills are finely covered with wood; and behind these, high and craggy mountains are presented to our view, destitute of trees, and of every kind of vegetation or verdure.
The contrast between the bold and barren rocks, on the one hand, and the verdant woods and luxuriant vale, on the other, heightens the rude majesty of the former, improves the swelling softness, and the richness of the latter, and on the whole, forms the most delightful view I ever beheld.
Thursday, June 9th.
From Kirby Lonsdale proceed to Kendal, situated on the River Ken, a town of considerable extent and of great antiquity.
A great number of people are employed here in the manufactures of cotton and woollen cloths, a great part of which is carried to Liverpool, from whence it is exported to the West Indies and to Guinea.
This town abounds with tanners.
To the north-east of Kendal, on an high eminence, which, in the southern and eastern parts of England, would be called an hill, are the ruins of a very old castle, with a deep ditch around it, of a circular form, and very spacious within; its diameter being near 150 yards.
Three bridges are built over the river.
The low land in the neighbourhood of Kendal is fertile, but it is surrounded by barren mountains and craggy rocks Leave Kendal, and pass through a country, than which one more barren, hilly, and dreary, cannot be imagined.
Ride to Bowness.
About a mile from this place we dismount from our horses, and ascend an hill covered with rude and craggy rocks, which commands a view that exceeds all description.
From this point is seen the greater part of the Windermere Lake, and ten islands.
On the largest of these there is an house, built in a circular form, at present belonging to a Mr. Christian, who purchased both island and house for 1,700 l. This island is not only beautiful in itself, from a variety of grounds, and clumps of trees, but it is so happily situated as to command a view of many of the enchanting objects on this lake.
The other islands are much smaller than this, but have a charming effect from being richly adorned with wood.
The margin of this lake is surrounded with rich meadows, fertile hills, and beautiful woods, with perpendicular precipices, and old yews and hollies growing out of the fis sures of the craggy rocks; all of them so curiously mixed and interspersed, and reflecting their images so accurately and so clearly in the transparent expanse below, that it would be difficult to conceive how nature herself could form a more captivating scene.
From different points of view, those natural beauties shew themselves in different shapes.
Some of the ablest pens have been employed, and the imagination of the poet has been racked, to give a description of this beautiful display of nature; but language is unable to convey the emotions that this scene excites, even with the aid of the most faithful pencil.
Therefore, whoever wishes to have a just conception of Windermere Lake, and its surrounding beauties, must view them on the spot.
Friday, June 10th.
Cross the ferry from Bowness, and walk to Hawks Head, about four miles distant.
This village is situated at the upper end of Estwait Water, which is about two miles in length, and half a mile broad, surrounded with fine woods and fertile meadows.
At the upper end of this piece of water is a good house, called Belmount, commanding a view of the whole.
In the afternoon we went to the head of Coniston Lake, but a thick fog coming on suddenly, we were deprived of the pleasure of seeing it, and obliged to return to Bowness by Ambleside and Low Wood Inn: but the same fog which prevented us from seeing Coniston Lake, hindered us also from seeing the adjacent country.
Saturday, June 11th.
Leave Bowness, and ride to the south end of Windermere.
The road is exceedingly good, and carried within a quarter of a mile of the lake, from one end to the other, sometimes through delightful woods, where, for a short time, the water and surrounding hills are hid from your view; but the water and opposite shore now and then appearing, as you advance, through the trees.
Sometimes you ride over fertile and beautiful vales, and frequently under high mountains, whose cliffs hang over the road.
There is not any part of this ride, which is continued for fourteen miles, that is not highly picturesque, and fitted to afford the most soothing ideas and exquisite gratification.
Return by Bowness, and go to Low Wood Inn to dinner.
This inn is situated about two miles from the north end of the lake, close upon its banks, and commands a prospect of all the upper part of the lake, and as far down as Windermere Island, with several of the smaller islands around it.
But from this point they are shut in with the surrounding head-lands, and lose their insular appearance, by which the beauty of the prospect is considerably diminished.
Sunday, June 12th.
Having met with a disappointment in our attempt to see Coniston Lake on Friday, and being determined to have a view of all the beauties which this extraordinary country affords, we ride to Coniston in the morning, which is at a distance, from Low Wood Inn, of nine miles.
The road is not very good, but the surrounding scenery is so interesting, that we had but little time to look down.
After riding about seven miles, we got to the top of an hill, from whence Coniston Lake is to be seen in its full extent.
It is a beautiful sheet of water, surrounded by rich meadows.
The lower parts of the adjacent mountains are well covered with wood.
There is, however, by no means such variety in the scenery here as in Windermere.
The hills as sume a more regular appearance in their summits, and reach, in general, to the water's edge in a more gentle descent.
The want of islands, too, is a great deficiency.
Coniston Lake should be seen before Windermere, as it certainly has great beauties, though by a comparison with Windermere, they are considerably les sened.
The north end of Coniston Lake is very bold and striking: and here we admire the situation of Coniston Hall, on an eminence, and surrounded with fine hanging woods, with rich pasture land below, reaching to the edge of the lake.
Behind and above the hall, several mountains rise with tremendous majesty, craggy, bleak, and barren; from the bosom of one of which a cataract is sues, which, in wet weather, must add considerably to the grandeur of the scene.
Return to Low Wood to dinner, and in the evening walk to the upper end of Windermere.
About two miles up in this romantic vale, is a house belonging to Sir Michael Le Fleming, called Rydal Hall.
In this vale runs the River Rothay, winding through beautiful woods and verdant meadows, till it falls into the lake.
On each side of the river are stupendous, black, and barren rocks.
Close by Rydal house is a water-fall, where Sir Michael Le Fleming has built a small house, in a most sequestered and convenient spot for enjoying it.
The fall is indeed nothing extraordinary, as it does not exceed twelve feet: but the noise of the water, and the dark shade of the trees around, form a gloomy scene, which fills the mind with a pleasing melancholy.
Monday, June 13th.
Leave Low Wood Inn, and ride through Ambleside to Keswick, a small village, at the head of Windermere Water.
Pass by Sir Michael Le Fleming's seat; and, at the distance of a quarter of a mile, enjoy a charming view of Rydal Water, in which are several beautiful islands!
A little further on is Rydal Pass, from which you look down upon a small lake, called Grassmere, in a most fertile vale, surrounded by mountains.
A few miles from hence is Thirlmere, or Thirl Water, a delightful lake, extending through a vale about four miles long.
Near the middle of this lake, a promontory extends from each side, and confines the water to the size of a small river, over which is a rustick bridge.
Ascend an high hill, from whence there is a most tremendous view of a deep and dismal glen, through which we pas sed, and ascended another mountain, where the eye is delighted with the enchanting view of Keswick Vale, the noble lake of Derwent Water, and part of Bas senthwaite.
This vale in circumference includes about twenty miles, and the land is exceedingly fertile.
Dine at Keswick, a neat little town, situated at the north end of the lake.
The afternoon was spent in rowing about upon this beautiful sheet of water, which is three miles long, and one and an half wide.
Four islands, called Pocklington's, Lord's, St. Herbert's, and Rapsholm, add greatly to the beauty of this water.
Some are covered with verdant turf; others are planted with various trees.
On Pocklington's Island is an elegant modern-built house, the ground about which is laid out with much taste.
After having viewed the magnificent prospects around this lake, from different stations, the rugged and perpendicular rocks of Barrowdale, and the verdant bosom of Skiddaw, return to our inn at Keswick, and On Tuesday the 14th, ride to the top of Skiddaw, which I believe is computed to be about 1,000 or 1,100 yards perpendicular from Derwent Water.
This mountain is by no means difficult of access, and is covered with grass, which gradually grows coarser as you ascend, till you come within a quarter of a mile of its summit, where it is very steep, and where the atmosphere is so rarified, as to prevent vegetation.
The whole top of the mountain is covered with a loose brown slaty stone, upon which it is difficult to walk.
On reaching the summit, we were deprived of having the view we expected, of the surrounding country, which in clear weather must be very extensive; but unfortunately at this time, all the distant objects were obscured by a thick haze.
Return to Keswick.
Wednesday, the 15th.
Go in a boat to the upper or south part of the lake, and visit the romantic regions of Barrowdale, where there is such a mixture of tremendous and beautiful scenery, as perhaps no other spot on earth can exhibit.
To describe the component parts which form the wonderful whole, would require the genius of Thomson or Salvator Rosa.
In this vale is a remarkable mine, where an abundance of mineral earth, or hard shin - ing stone, is found, which we call black lead, and which is sold for ten shillings per pound.
This is said to be the only mine of the same kind in Europe.
It is opened once in five or seven years, and a sufficient quantity taken out to answer all the purposes to which it is applied for that period of time.
Through the vale winds the River Derwent, which forms the lake, and afterwards pas ses into Bas senthwaite-Water.
After having spent the morning in this delightful vale, return to an house called Low Dore Inn, which is situated close by a celebrated fall of water, called by the same name.
The cataract falls from a vast height, through a large chasm, from one craggy precipice to another, until it is lost in the lake.
After heavy falls of rain, this natural exhibition must be tremendous.
Return in the evening, with reluctance, to Keswick.
After viewing this elysium, which affords the greatest gratification to every traveller, we could not avoid indulging one melan - choly reflection--- that the descendants of the antient proprietors should still be deprived of their birth-right.
The liberality of the British parliament has been nobly exercised, in returning the forfeited estates in Scotland.
It is to be hoped, that the same benevolence will be extended to the family of Radcliff.
Thursday, June 16th.
We ride to Ulls Water, at the distance of fifteen miles, a great part of the way over a dreary moor, and the country round very barren.
In this moor we were caught by a violent hail storm.
Being entirely exposed, we were obliged to turn our horses backs to the storm, and to stand still till it pas sed over; for the hailstones were so large, that it was impos sible to face it.
Dine at Pulobridge, a very bad inn, where we could not get any beds.
Go on five miles, and sleep at Penrith.
On Friday 17th, return to Ulls Water.
Ride on the side of the lake, five miles, to Lyulph's Tower, an house lately built by Lord Surrey,( now Duke of Norfolk) in form of a castle, for the accommodation of his friends, and those who go to see the lake.
The construction of this house is very whimsical.
It has two circular turrets.
In the centre, which is flat, is an enormous window, which serves to light several rooms within the turrets, which are large enough for bed-rooms.
The outside of the building is quite in the stile of an old castle; and viewed from the water, has a very pretty effect.
Leave our horses at Lyulph's Tower, and go to the upper end of the lake in a boat.
Return to the tower to dinner, which was a very decent one, and recommended by a very kind reception.
After dinner, walk about a mile from the tower, up a dale, where there is a cascade.
This fall is much superior to any that I have seen in this country, being fifty feet, and having a greater body of water in it.
Ulls Water is sixty fathom deep, and in many places very steep.
It is about ten miles long, and nearly three miles broad, and has more the appearance of a lake than any of the others, as you can look over, at one view, a greater expanse of water.
Like the others, it is surrounded by high mountains and perpendicular rocks; and, in many places, are yews, holly, and birch, apparently growing out of the solid mass of stone: some young, and in a flourishing condition; others worn out with age.
On the banks of the lake there is a great deal of pasture, and some arable land.
There are several good houses here, situated so as to command most beautiful views.
The land also round the lake is well wooded.
But in general, Ulls Water is by no means so well adorned with wood as the other lakes, particularly Windermere.
At the upper end, however, there is a remarkably fine wood, reaching from the water's edge nearly to the summit of the mountain, which is, at least, one thousand feet high.
This wood consists of holly, birch, yew, and oak; and though none of the trees are large, it nevertheless makes a beautiful appearance.
At this end of the lake there are three little islands, or rather rocks, covered only with a few shrubs; and at the farthest extremity is a little village, called Patterdale, surrounded by fine wood and rich meadows.
A river runs through this village, which falls into the lake.
In an old ruinous house there lives a miser, who calls himself the King of Patterdale.
In the evening we return by water, to the south end of the lake, which is adorned by a beautiful hill, belonging to Mr. Has sel, called Dunmallet.
This hill is covered with a variety of trees, and the different shades of green have a pleasing effect.
Sleep at Penrith.
Between this place and Ulls Water, the country is well cultivated, and enriched by several gentlemen's seats, with large plantations about them; among which are the antient seats of the Earl of Surrey and Lord Lonsdale: the former called Grey Stock Park, the latter Lowther Hall.
Saturday, 18th June.
Penrith is a neat well built little town.
On an eminence are the remains of an old castle.
The church is a very handsome and spacious building.
In the church-yard there are two very remarkable stones, about eight feet high, and fifteen feet asunder, with three very curious ones between, put edgeways, and joined at the top.
This, I suppose, has been the burying place of some antient warrior; but the antiquarians have not been able to decypher the inscription, or to trace the antiquity of the monument.
On an high hill, to the north of the town, stands a watch-tower, or beacon, built entirely of stone, which commands a very distant view of all the country round, and was formerly intended to give the alarm of the approach of an enemy.
To the north-east is a range of very high mountains, called Cross Fells, or the British Alps, on which the snow, in large quantities, is very visible.
In some places, I am told, it remains all the year round.
Dine at Penrith, and ride to Carlisle in the evening.
The country between these two towns is very capable of cultivation, and actually undergoing rapid improvement.
In this tract of country, there is much corn land; and, about Carlisle, there is a great extent of rich grazing land, on both sides of the River Eden, which runs by the town.
Sunday, 19th June.
Carlisle is a city of considerable extent, surrounded by a wall thirty feet high, which is going fast to decay.
At the north end of the town stands the castle, the rudest heap of stones that were ever piled together by the industry of man.
There are four old invalids who take care of the ammunition kept in it, of which there is a considerable quantity, and 500 stand of arms.
On the walls are mounted thirty guns, from six to twenty - four pounders, and among these the guns with which the town was reduced in 1745, by the Duke of Cumberland.
The ditch around the castle is a filthy stagnated pool.
Between the old citadel or castle, and the walls and mote by which it is separated from the town, is a declining bank, on which there is a row of trees, planted by the hands of the unfortunate Mary Queen of Scots, when a prisoner in Carlisle.
There are many very good houses in this town, though, in general, it is very ill built, and exces sively dirty, from the circumstances of its being surrounded by a wall, and having only a few outlets.
Over the river, which is pretty large, are thrown two very elegant bridges.
The cathedral is an handsome old building, in the Gothic style; the stone of a brick-dust red, like the cathedral at Litchfield.
Near this edifice there is a very modern church, which looks on the outside more like a ballroom than a place of worship.
