A Guide To The Lakes, In Cumberland, Westmorland And Lancashire, Illustrated With Twenty Views Of Local Scenery, And A Travelling Map Of The Adjacent Country By John Robinson, D.D.
Rector Of Clifton, Westmorland.
Awful scenes that calm the troubled breast, And woo the weary to profound repose; Can passion's wildest uproar lay to rest, And whisper comfort to the man of woes!
Beattie London: Printed For Lackington, Hughes, Harding, Mavor, And Jones, Finsbury Square.
1819.
London: Printed By Thomas Davison, Whitefriars Preface.
In compiling the following Guide to the Lakes in the north of England, the author has been chiefly solicitious to comprise much information within a small compass, and to render his descriptions as accurate as possible.
If, however, in any instance, he has failed in the faithfulness of his remarks, he entreats the candid reader to attribute such inaccuracy to some unperceived mistake of his own, or to the incorrect information of others, and not to any designed misrepresentation.
With his own observations on the scenery of the Lakes, the author has incorporated those of our most celebrated tour writers.
When able assistance was at hand, he would not have consulted his own ease, nor the instruction and amusement of others, if he had neglected to use it.
Indeed, a work of this kind would be very defective, if it should not contain the masterly delineations of Pennant, Gilpin, Young, and Budworth.
The author has endeavoured to notice every object deserving the attention of the tourist, and to furnish such accurate information as may enable him to visit the Lakes, and survey their beauties, with the least expense of time.
With respect to the plates, the views were taken expressly for the purpose of this work.
It has been justly observed, that" a more pleasing tour than these Lakes hold out to men of leisure and curiosity cannot be desired.
We penetrate the Glaciers, traverse the Rhone and the Rhine, whilst our domestic Lakes of Ullswater, Keswick, and Windermere, exhibit scenes in so sublime a style, with such beautiful colourings of rocks, wood, and water, backed with so tremendous a disposition of mountains, that if they do not fairly take the lead of all the views in Europe, yet they are indisputably such as no English traveller should leave behind him."
Contents.
Page Penrith... ... ... ... 1 Lowther Castle... ... ... 18 Hawes Water... ... ... ... 23 Ullswater... ... ... ... 29 Vale of St. John... ... ... 66 Druidical Temple... ... ... 69 Keswick... ... ... ... 72 Derwent Water, Keswick Lake... 76 Moonlight Voyage... ... ... 115 Skiddaw... ... ... ... 120 Lowdore Waterfall... ... ... 126 Journey to the Wad mines... ... 131 The Wad mines... ... ... 140 Wastwater... ... ... ... 144 Watenlath... ... ... ... 148 Bassenthwaite Lake... ... ... 152 Buttermere Water... ... ... 160 Scale Force... ... ... ... 173 Crummock or Cromack Water... ... 176 Vale of Lorton... ... ... 181 Lowes Water... ... ... 179 Page Ennerdale Water 187 Legberthwaite 197 Leathes Water, or Wythburn Water 200 Helvellyn 204 Dunmail Raise 216 Grasmere Water 219 Rydal Water 226 Rydal Hall ibid Ambleside 239 Windermere 248 Low Wood Inn 253 Bowness 257 Curwen's Island 266 Esthwaite Water 278 Hawkshead 281 Coniston Water 282 Furness Abbey 289 View from Birkrigg 306 Conishead Priory 307 Road to Kendal 309 Kendal 310 Levens Hall 317 Milnthorp 320 Directions For Placing The Engravings.
Page The Map to face the Title Hawes Water 24 Ullswater, from Stybarrow Crag 44 Goldrill Bridge, in Patterdale 59 Brother Water, near Patterdale 59 Keswick Lake, Derwentwater 77 Lowdore 127 Bowder Stone 134 Borrowdale, from Bowder Stone 136 Buttermere Water 164 Cromack Water 177 Smallthwaite Bridge 199 Wythburn or Leathes Water 200 Grasmere 223 Rydal Water 226 Brathay Bridge 244 Winandermere, from the ferry, near the station 277 Coniston Lake, from Nibthwaite Forge 285 Furness Abbey 289 Ditto, second view 292 Newby Bridge, at the foot of Winandermere 309 Errata.
Page 19, line 8, for" Bookham Wood," read Buckholme Wood.
Page 172.
Since the account of Mary of Buttermere was written, the author has been informed that Mary and her husband have removed from the inn, and now live in another part of the county.
Pp.
96 to 113.
From folio 96 the pagination proceeds to 113, the intervening numbers having been cancelled.
A Guide To The Lakes.
Penrith is situated in a pleasant open vale, at the foot of a considerable eminence.
The country for several miles in extent is fertile, and well cultivated; and the late inclosure of the extensive common on the north of the town has added very considerably to its appearance.
The houses in Penrith are in general well built, and many of them lofty and elegant, especially towards the centre of the principal street, which runs in the direction of the great road, north and south.
They are chiefly built of red freestone, and covered with blue slate.
Footpaths of hewn stone are laid on the sides of the principal streets, and contribute to the clean and pleasing appearance of the place.
The great road from the north to the south, and also that into Lancashire, pass through this town.
Penrith contains a great number of good and commodious inns, among which may be particularly mentioned the New Crown Inn, kept by Mr. Atkinson, and the George Inn, by Mr. Tyson.
The market is well supplied with provisions; and new shambles have been erected in a suitable part of the town.
It is, perhaps, a subject for regret, that so respectable and populous a town as Penrith should not be lighted with lamps during the winter nights.
The church was rebuilt in 1722.
It is a fine structure, distinguished by a neat and elegant simplicity.
It is uniformly seated with oak, and divided by a centre aisle and two side aisles, well lighted by spacious windows.
The body of the choir is left open to a lofty ceiling, but the side aisles are covered with galleries, which unite in the west, where is the entrance to those galleries by a staircase leading to each wing.
The galleries are supported on rows of excellent Ionic columns, ten on each side, each column formed of one entire stone, brought from the quarries of Crawdundale, in the county of Westmorland; each column is ten feet four inches in height, and in the swell four feet two inches in circumference.
The stone is brought to a good polish, and being red and finely veined has the appearance of mahogany.
In this church is an elegant organ.
The pulpit and reading desk are placed in the middle aisle, which is ornamented with two large gilt chandeliers, inscribed with the following honourable testimony to the loyalty of the inhabitants, during the rebellion in 1745:--" These chandeliers were purchased with the Fifty Guineas given by the most noble William, Duke of Portland, to his tenants of the honour of Penrith, who, under his Grace's encouragement, associated in the defence of the government and town of Penrith, against the rebels, in 1745."
Hutchinson's History of Cumberland.
On one of the walls of this church is the following melancholy record of the ravages of a pestilence toward the end of the reign of Queen Elizabeth: A.D. M, D, Xcviii, ex gravi peste, quae regionibus hisce incubuit, obierunt apud Penrith 2260, Kendal 2500, Richmond 2200, Carlisle 1196.
Posteri, Avortite vos et vivite.
This memorial on brass has been substituted in the place of a more ancient inscription engraven on stone.
It appears from an ancient register kept in the parish, that this dreadful pestilence raged here from September 22, 1597, to January 5, 1599, a period of fifteen months!
In the churchyard is a remarkable monument, called the giant's grave, which is apparently of great antiquity.
It consists of two upright pillars of stone, about ten feet in height, and fifteen feet from each other, in the direction of east and west; and on each side of the tomb two stones of a semicircular form are placed in the ground.
This seems to have been a sepulchral monument; but whether British, Roman, Saxon, or Danish, has been disputed.
Mr. Pennant, however, observes, that" these stones seem to have been monumental, and are evidently christian, as appears by the cross on the capital; fable says, that they were to perpetuate the memory of Caesarius, a hero of gigantic stature, whose body extended from stone to stone; but it is probable that the space marked by these columns contained several bodies, or might have been a family sepulchre."
That this monument was erected after the establishment of Christianity may be inferred from the rude representation of a cross, which appears toward the summit of one of the pillars.
The name of the giant's grave, which this singular monument has retained through a succession of ages, and the rude sculpture on one part of it, render it probable that it was erected to the memory of some British prince or chief, and seem to favour the traditionary story, that it is the tomb of Sir Ewan or Hugh CaeSARIUS, a man of great courage, who was successful in clearing the forest of Inglewood from the ferocious wild boars, which in those remote times infested the neighbouring country.
In an age when the stature of a hero was magnified by popular credulity, it is not surprising that this valorous knight, who perhaps exceeded the common size, should, in proportion to the danger and magnitude of his enterprises, be exalted into a giant.
Mr. Pennant observes, that the semicircular stones are charged with the reliefs of four boars or wild hogs; but Bishop Lyttleton says, that" it requires a strong imagination to discover any regular figure in the rude sculptures on them."
Not far from this monument is a pillar called the giant's thumb, about six feet high, with an expanded head, perforated on both sides; the use and design of which are not apparent.
Some, however, think it to be the remains of a rose cross, rudely cut, and now broken; and that it may have been removed from the old church to its present site, since similar crosses are observable in old abbeys.
The Old Castle, majestic even in its ruins, stands upon a small eminence on the west side of the town.
It is built of red freestone, is formed on a parallelogram, and fortified with a rampier and very deep fosse or ditch; its towers once Broad, massive, high, and stretching far, And held impregnable in war.
Scott's Marmion.
Among the ruins is a subterraneous passage, which leads to a house in Penrith, called Dockray Hall, about three hundred yards distant.
The only approach to the castle was on the side next to the town, where an opening through the works still appears, and which is supposed to have been kept by a drawbridge.
The date of its foundation cannot be determined with any precision; but there is nothing in the style of the architecture which indicates a greater antiquity than the reign of Edward Iv.
It was for some time the residence of King Richard Iii., who selected it as a proper situation for repressing the inroads of the Scots, and for keeping in subjection the inhabitants of this district, who were attached to the house of Lancaster.
It continued in the possession of the crown from the time of King Richard Iii.
to the Revolution, when it was granted, together with the honour of Penrith, to William Bentinck, Earl of Portland.
In 1783, the late Duke of Portland sold it, together with the honour of Penrith, to the Duke of Devonshire.
In the contest between King Charles I. and his parliament, this castle was seized by the adherents of the commonwealth, and dismantled; and the lead, timber, and other materials, were sold.
The Beacon is a monument of those turbulent times which preceded the union of the two kingdoms.
It stands upon a considerable eminence, about a mile from the town of Penrith, and overlooks a tract of country at least one hundred miles in circumference.
The view from the beacon extends over Cumberland, parts of Westmorland, Lancashire, and Yorkshire, and even into the counties of Northumberland and Durham. "
The north and east windows of this edifice afford a prospect of Cross Fell, with the pike of Dufton, and a chain of mountains extending almost thirty miles from south to north, the northern extremity terminating near to Brampton.
The Scotch mountains form the most distant horizon; in the vale, a faint appearance of St. Mary's church, in Carlisle, is to be discovered.
From the eastern window is a view of the country towards Stainmore, terminated by the lofty promontory of Wildbore Fell, and its neighbouring mountains, near Kirkby Stephen and Brough.
The southern window presents a view of Brougham Castle, with its rich plains; and the spreading woods of Lowther, intermixed with a fine scene of cultivated lands, form the more distant rising grounds.
Some parts of Ullswater are seen, while the mighty rocks and mountains which environ it lift up their heads in rude confusion, and close the scene.
The western window presents a prospect not less pleasing: the town of Penrith lies before you, and here and there the rivers Eamont and Lowther show their meanderings through the woods, which grow along their banks.
The eminence above the town is crowned with the awful remains of the castle.
Beyond these objects, amidst a range of mountains, at the distance of eighteen miles, Skiddaw is seen, whose majestic front overlooks all the adjacent high lands."
Such are the objects seen from this majestic hill, which has been purchased by the Earl of Lonsdale, and which has since assumed a lively appearance.
The whole of this hill has been planted with trees, which appear at a distance, and which ere long will wave gracefully above the vale.
To the credit of the inhabitants of Penrith, the lands have been cultivated by them to the verge of these plantations; and they have erected several buildings, which enliven the view of this beautiful declivity.
Hutchinson's History of Cumberland, vol.
I. p. 343,&amp; c. In the neighbourhood of Penrith is Carleton Hall, the seat of the Right Honourable Thomas Wallace, M.P.
It stands in a fertile vale, and has a fine lawn in the front, intersected by the Eamont: on its western extremity it is washed by the River Lowther, and the whole is overlooked by wooded eminences, which command a view over a rich and beautiful country.
To the west, a large portion of the vale of Eamont expands to the eye, and beyond it the mountainous region in which Ullswater is situated.
To the east, we observe Crossfell, a high and dreary mountain, standing on an immense base of twenty miles in circumference, and surrounded with a group of hills as barren and as desolate as itself.
In the vicinity of the house have been formed various walks, from which the beauty and richness of the country are seen in different points of view.
About a mile from Penrith, on the road to Temple Sowerby, stands Brougham Castle, upon the banks of the Eamont, where that river forms a junction with the River Lowther.
It is now only an extensive ruin, but seems formerly to have been a place of some strength, though we have no means of ascertaining its antiquity.
It is situated on the north side of the Roman station Brovoniacum, which has formed an area and outwork one hundred and twenty paces square, defended by a vallum and an outward ditch, both very discernible.
Brougham was the lordship and castle of the Viponts, and was included in the barony of Appleby and Brough, given to Robert the Vipont by King John, from whose family it descended to the Cliffords.
It remained in this family, till a daughter of the celebrated Countess of Pembroke gave it by marriage to that of the Tuftons, Earls of Thanet, in which it now remains.
A great part of this once noble edifice was deliberately taken down in 1728, and the materials sold!
Near to Eamont Bridge, which divides the counties of Cumberland and Westmorland, is that memorial of ancient times, so often described under the name of Arthur's Round Table, a green circular spot of twenty - nine yards in diameter, inclosed by a dry ditch, and beyond this by a bank; each in sufficient preservation to shew exactly what has been its form.
This was probably the scene of many a tournament in the days of chivalry.
At a short distance from the Round Table, and nearer to Eamont Bridge, is another circular ditch, with a very low rampart, but of much greater size.
If we consider the former as intended for feats of chivalry, it is probable that within this circus pedestrians exhibited their agility.
About half a mile west of the Round table is Mayburg, or Maybrough, a hill of gradual ascent, having a circular fence of pebble-stones upon the summit, surrounding an area of one hundred paces in diameter.
This fence is very singular in its construction: the stones seem to have been collected from the adjacent river; and no kind of cement appears to have been used in forming the fence.
Not far from the centre of the circle stands a massy column of unhewn stone, eleven feet in height, and near the middle twenty - two feet in circumference; this stone is a species of freestone, and appears to have been taken from the surface, and not obtained in any quarry.
Some old persons in the neighbourhood say that there were two or three more stones of a similar nature, standing in a position with this, so as to form a square; but as the stones were injurious to the land, the rest have been destroyed and removed.
This rude construction is evidently of remote antiquity; but of the various conjectures which have been formed respecting its use, few appear to rest on any solid foundation.
Tradition says, that this place was a Roman amphitheatre, where criminals were compelled to combat with wild beasts, and that these stones were intended to afford a refuge to the unhappy men, during the dreadful period of the conflict. "
The use of this accumulation," observes Mr. Pennant," seems to have been the same with that called Bryn Gwyn, at Trer Dryw, in Anglesey, a supreme consistory of druidical administration, as the British name imports.
That in Anglesey is constructed in the same manner with this; but at present there are no remains of columns in the interior part."
Some writers, supposing Mayburgh to be a corruption of Maiden Burg, a title frequently given to fortresses esteemed impregnable, are of opinion that this was a British fortification; but the larger stone erected in the centre, and the others which formerly stood near it, overthrow this conjecture, and prove that this could not have been its appropriation.
The elevated ground upon which Mayburgh is situated, the shadowy wood that surrounds it, and the rude column near the centre, incline us to adopt the opinion of Mr. Hutchinson, who thinks that it was a temple of the Druids, where, under the shade of the consecrated grove, they exercised their religious rites, taught the multitude, and initiated their pupils in the mysteries of their religion.
The word Maiden has sometimes the acceptation of military, as the Maiden Ways in Northumberland.
See History of Cumberland, vol.
i. p. 311.
About half a mile beyond Eamont Bridge is Brougham Hall, the seat of Henry Brougham, Esq.
This delightful mansion is situated upon an eminence to the east from the road, is surrounded by shrubberies and pleasure grounds, and commands the most lovely and extensive views in almost every direction.
From its elevated situation, and its extensive and various prospects, Brougham Hall has been sometimes designated The Windsor Of The North.
From the terrace, which extends from north to south, the views are various and extensive.
To the south, you observe the windings of a beautiful river, the extensive woods of Lowther, and at some distance, the village of Clifton and the tower of Clifton Hall, once the residence of the Wyberghs.
To the west, you look down on a level of rich meadows, washed by the River Lowther; and in a more distant view, you have the village of Yanwath, Yanwath Hall, and the mountain scenery of Ullswater, with a variety of different objects, which are seen in an extent of eighteen miles.
To the north, you view the village and river of Eamont, the bridge which separates the counties of Westmorland and Cumberland, the delightful grounds which spread round Carleton Hall, the town of Penrith, its church, and the ruins of its ancient castle.
About half a mile from Brougham Hall is Clifton Hall, and the village of Clifton.
This hall is now reduced to a solitary tower; its slated roof and modern sash windows spoil that interest which we should otherwise feel in contemplating ancient edifices.
From the rectory of Clifton is a most delightful view of the whole surrounding scenery, except to the south.
From Clifton, a pleasant ride of a mile and a half, through Bookham Wood and Lowther Park, brings you to Lowther Castle, the magnificent seat of the Earl of Lonsdale.
It is said that Lord Macartney, during his embassy to China, whilst describing a magnificent and romantic scene in the imperial park at Gehol, observed, that" it reminded him of Lowther in Westmorland, which, from the extent of prospect, the grand surrounding objects, the noble situation, the diversity of surface, the extensive woods, and command of water, might," in the opinion of his lordship," be rendered by a man of sense, spirit, and taste, the finest scene in the British dominions."
The present Earl of Lonsdale, by the erection of this noble edifice, and by greatly improving the whole of the surrounding grounds, has nearly realized the scene suggested by Lord Macartney.
Lowther Castle was erected a few years since, on the site of an ancient and decayed mansion, and is situated on the banks of the River Lowther.
This noble structure of pale freestone, rising from lofty woods of the greenest verdure, produces an exquisitely fine effect.
The chief approach to the castle is from the north, where its numerous towers of different elevation are seen rising in beautiful proportion, the whole assuming a massy appearance of great magnificence.
The north and south fronts of this princely mansion, which rose with unequalled rapidity, are of entirely different characters.
The north may be said to have the appearance of a castle; the south of a cathedral.
The north exhibits its battlements, its ramparts, its arrow-slits, and its towers; the south has its niches, its pinnacles, and its cloisters.
The scenes are as various from the two fronts as the fronts themselves.
The south is a solemn close scene: a beautiful but diminishing lawn soon terminates among the loftiest trees; the objects of the eye are bounded, but the imagination is left to wander among the recesses of the forest.
The prospects from the north front are more extensive, and are seen from a terrace of ninety feet in breadth, and perhaps four times as much in length.
The eye first descends on a lovely and spacious park, rich with trees of the finest growth.
This park is surrounded by a vast wood, over which Penrith Beacon is seen in the distance.
The eminence upon which the beacon stands is also planted; and, in a very few years, that eminence( except a slip of cultivation near its base) will appear as a continuation of the same forest.
We shall not attempt to describe the interior of the castle, but shall just observe that the rooms are finished with British oak, real or imitated; and that the portico, the saloon, the corridor, the staircase, and all the leading apartments, partake of gothic magnificence.
West of the castle are gardens laid out in former centuries, and venerable with age.
Overlooking the deer-park, a terrace of the softest verdure stretches above a thousand yards; and there is an interesting elevation by which it may be easily extended a thousand yards farther.
Nature, indeed, has been uncommonly bountiful to this domain.
An undulating surface contributes to the interest of its scenes; the boldest hills are clothed with lofty woods; and open spaces, judiciously introduced in the vale below, are all that is wanting to give these woody eminences their full effect.
Few inanimate objects please the beholder more than a full-grown tree.
The woods of Lowther are inferior to none in the kingdom.
Weeping birches, elegant beeches, luxuriant pines, and majestic oaks, several of fifteen or twenty feet in circumference, compose these woods.
The removal of a few inferior and intervening objects seems all that is wanting to give the leading beauties their full effect.
Already, indeed, Lowther has become the ornament of the kingdom.
The church of Lowther stands a little to the north from the castle, and is just seen from the road half buried among trees; it is a neat modern edifice, and seems to have been built after the model of St. Paul's cathedral.
The rectory house is a good modern building at the foot of the hill, on the right of the road to Askham.
After passing Lowther Castle, you come to the village of Askham; and upon an eminence stands Askham Hall, the property of the Earl of Lonsdale.
From this hall are seen the vale in which stands the rectory of Lowther, the pass of Askham Bridge, and the hanging woods of Lowther.
From this place the road winds for about two miles through the fertile vale of Bampton, overlooked by the steep Knipe Scar, whose summit is covered with plantations of thick pines.
The village of Bampton is long and straggling, but beautifully interspersed with farm-houses among the highly-cultivated lands.
The free-school at Bampton has long been distinguished for the eminent scholars it has produced; among whom may be particularly mentioned the learned Edmund Gibson, some time Bishop of London, and the late eminent Judge Wilson.
A pleasant road leads from Bampton to Hawes Water, which is distant about eleven miles from Penrith. "
The approach to this lake is very picturesque: you pass between two high ridges of mountains, the banks finely spread with inclosures; upon the right two most beautiful hills, one of them covered with wood; they are most pleasantly elegant. "
The lake is a small one, about three miles long, half a mile over in some places, and a quarter in others; almost divided in the middle by a promontory of inclosures, joined only by a strait, so that it consists of two sheets of water.
The upper end of it is fine, with bold, steep, craggy rocks and mountains; and in the centre of the end, a few little inclosures at their feet, waving upward in a very beautiful manner. "
The south side of the lake is a noble ridge of mountains, very bold and prominent down to the water-edge.
They bulge out in the centre of a fine, bold, pendant, broad head, that is venerably magnificent; and the view of the first sheet of the lake, losing itself in the second among hills, rocks, woods,&amp; c. is picturesque.
The opposite side consists of inclosures rising one above another, and crowned with craggy rocks."
Mr. Young.
This lake is seldom visited by travellers, though it is distinguished by the solemn grandeur of its rocks and mountains, which rise in bold characters.
Looking upon the first expanse of the lake, its eastern shore rises in a tremendous ridge of rocks, darkened with wood to the summit, and appears to terminate in Wellow Crag, a promontory of great height, beyond which the lake recedes from sight.
The finely broken mountains on the west are covered with heath, and the summits impend in crags and precipices; but their ascent from the water is more gradual than that of the opposite rocks; and they are skirted by a narrow margin of vivid green with tufted shrubs and little groves, which overhang the lake, and are reflected on its surface.
Above, a very few white cottages among wood appear, and the narrow perspective is closed by the dark summit of the hills.
The second expanse of the lake discloses a scenery still more sublime.
This perspective seems to be terminated by the huge mountain called Castle Crag; but as you advance, Harterfell rears his awful front, impending over the water, and confines the scene.
Here, amidst rocks, and at the entrance of a glen almost choked by fragments from the heights, stands the chapel of Mardale.
Among the fells of this dark prospect are Lathale, Wilter Crag, Castle Crag, and Riggendale, whose bold lines appear beyond each other.
Kidsey Pike is pre-eminent among the crowding summits beyond the eastern shore; on the west is High Street, which overlooks the head of Ullswater.
The views from the parsonage at Mardale are said to be very delightful and interesting.
Hawes Water is the property of the Earl of Lonsdale, and abounds with perch, trout, eels, chub, and other fish.
A few char are occasionally taken here; but they are said to be inferior in quality to those in other lakes, and to be much less esteemed.
Returning by Bampton to Askham, and leaving the latter village, you take the road to Pooley Bridge.
After ascending westward for some time through a winding lawn, a prospect of great beauty and extent discloses itself.
In the east rises the long chain of mountains, commonly called the Black Fells, in the midst of which Cross Fell stands pre-eminent.
If you ascend to Winder, which is said to be the highest inhabited ground in Westmorland, the prospect is still more commanding.
In the south-east a beautiful vale, called the Vale of Eden, and sometimes the bottom of Westmorland, stretches towards Stainmore.
The horizon to the north and the east is bounded by lines of mountains, ranged above each other.
Of these Cross Fell gives its name to the whole northern ridge, which, in its full extent, from the neighbourhood of Gilsland to that of Kirkby Stephen, is nearly fifty miles.
In the south-east appears Wildbore Fell, a high mountain near the town of Kirkby Stephen.
This perspective of the extensive vale of Eden possesses a high degree of grandeur and magnificence.
The vale is finely wooded, and adorned with mansions, parks, meadow land, corn, towns, villages, and all that enrich a distant landscape.
Among its peculiarities may be reckoned hills of alpine shape rising like pyramids in the middle of the vale, some of them covered with wood, whilst others remain barren and rocky.
After descending to Pooley Bridge, you may proceed to Penrith by way of Eamont Bridge, or by Dalemain, on the north side of the Eamont.
Ullswater.
This beautiful lake, which is thought by some to combine the beauties of all the rest, is about nine miles in length, and, in some parts, one mile in breadth.
Its form or outline has been not unaptly compared to the letter Z, but with angles less acute.
It may be conveniently visited from Penrith, from which it is distant about five miles; an excellent road leading to it on each side of the Eamont, through a vale, in general, rich in pastoral scenery.
The road on the north of the Eamont leads by Dalemain, the sweetly secluded seat of Edward Hasell, Esq., surrounded with woody eminences.
The other road from Penrith crosses the Eamont at Eamont Bridge, and turns to the west near Arthur's Round Table, which it leaves on the left.
Proceeding in this direction, the face of the country continues for a mile or two level and fertile; the road passes through shady lanes, from which the prospect over the surrounding country is shut out by trees and hedges, except at intervals.
The appearance gradually changes.
Mountains are seen towering to the clouds in the rudest order, increasing in awful grandeur, and seeming to threaten the intrusive stranger with destruction, if he should venture to approach them.
At the village of Pooley is an inn called the Sun, where the traveller may be comfortably accommodated.
Ullswater is surrounded on all sides, except the east, by ranges of mountains, which, in the neighbourhood of Pooley, are of no great height, but are chiefly cultivated and divided into farms.
However, farther to the west, these mountains gradually assume a greater height, approach nearer to the water, and on one side impede all farther passage in that direction.
In this manner they appear to the extremity of the lake in Patterdale, where they rear their rocky heads to the clouds, surround Ullswater, and produce, with other objects, the grandest and most magnificent scenes.
Ullswater is in general very deep, and particularly near to Patterdale.
At its eastern termination, where the Eamont flows out of the lake, it is more shallow, and beautifully transparent.
It contains vast quantities of different kinds of fish, such as char, eels, trouts, bass, or perch, and schelleys or gwiniads.
The lake or grey trout is sometimes, though seldom, taken in season; it is commonly twenty or thirty pounds in weight.
Leaving the village of Pooley, the traveller crosses a bridge over the Eamont, and may ascend Dunmallet, a steep conical hill, which, however, is of no great height, and is chiefly covered with wood.
This hill affords a prospect of great beauty and softness.
At the foot of the hill is the lake, the outlines of which are broken by numerous capes and retiring bays, particularly to the south.
From this point the lake appears on all sides surrounded with mountains; those on the left are lofty and craggy, and exhibit in several parts dreadful precipices.
The hills on the right are lower, and gradually slope towards the water.
Near the bases of these hills many woody copses, cultivated fields, and farms with white cottages scattered around, tend much to enliven the prospect.
At the extremity of this expanse is the mountain called Hallen Fell, which projects boldly into the lake, and forms with Swarth Fell a spacious bay.
Upon the summit of Dunmallet are still to be seen the vestiges of a Roman fort, surrounded by a foss.
Its dimensions are 110 paces by 37.
This fort must have been of much consequence in guarding the lake and the pass, and in maintaining a connexion between the garrisons of Ambleside and Brougham.
Mr. Gray visited Ullswater by the road from Penrith, on the northern side, which leads by Dalemain.
His observations are as follow:--" A grey autumnal day, the air perfectly calm and mild, went to see Ullswater, five miles distant; soon left the Keswick road, and turned to the left through shady lanes along the vale of Eamont, which runs rapidly on near the way, rippling over the stones: to the right is Dalemain, a large fabric of pale red stone, with nine windows in the front and seven on the side, built by Mr. Hasell; behind it a fine lawn surrounded by woods, and a long rocky eminence rising over them; a clear and brisk rivulet runs by the house to join the Eamont, whose course is in sight and at a small distance.
Further on appears Hutton St. John, a castle-like old mansion of Mr. Huddleston.
Approached Dunmallet, a fine pointed hill, covered with wood, planted by old Mr. Hasell before-mentioned, who lives always at home, and delights in planting.
Walked over a spongy meadow or two, and began to mount the hill, through a broad straight green alley among the trees, and with some toil gained the summit.
From hence saw the lake open directly at my feet, majestic in its calmness, clear and smooth as a blue mirror, with winding shores and low points of land covered with green inclosures, while farm-houses looking out among the trees, and cattle feeding.
The water is almost every where bordered with cultivated lands, gently sloping upwards, from a mile to a quarter of a mile in breadth, till they reach the feet of the mountains, which rise very rude and awful with their broken tops on either hand.
Directly in front, at better than three miles distance, Place Fell, one of the bravest among them, pushes its bold broad breast into the midst of the lake, and forces it to alter its course, joining first a large bay to the left, and then bending to the right.
I descended Dunmallet again, by a side avenue, that was only not perpendicular, and came to Barton Bridge over the Eamont, then walking through a path in the wood round the bottom of the hill, came forth where the Eamont issues out of the lake, and continued my way along its western shore, close to the water, and generally on a level with it.
The lake is nine miles long; and at widest under a mile in breadth.
After extending itself three miles and a half in a line to south-west, it turns at the foot of Place Fell almost due west, and is not here twice the breadth of the Thames at London.
It is soon again interrupted by the root of Helvellyn, a lofty and very rugged mountain, and spreading again, turns off to the south-east, and is lost among the deep recesses of the hills.
To this second turning I pursued my way about four miles along its border, beyond a village scattered among trees, and called Watermillock."
Hallen Hag.
Pooley Bridge.
From Dunmallet the road proceeds along the northern margin of the lake, from which it sometimes recedes a little.
On the right is Soulby Fell, which has been recently planted with wood; and behind the higher end of this fell, at a place called Maiden Castle, was a Benedictine nunnery, of which scarcely any vestiges now remain.
In your progress, you pass several handsome modern houses, particularly Ramsbach Lodge, the residence of B.E.
Stagg, esq., with a lawn in front sloping to a beautiful wood, which reaches to the margin of the lake, and through which is a pleasant winding footpath.
Half a mile beyond this, at Bennet Head, which derives its name from the nunnery before-mentioned, is a modern built house which belongs to Mr. Todd, and which commands a fine view over part of the lake.
Watermillock, the celebrated seat of the late Mr. Robinson, next presents itself.
This delightful residence is deeply sequestered amid beech and sycamore trees, which shelter it from every inclement blast.
The prospect from this house is singularly varied, every window presenting a charming landscape differing from one another both in objects and style.
Beneath is the lower end of the first reach of Ullswater, which here takes a majestic sweep.
Opposite is Swarth Fell, a naked rock, deeply indented by successive storms and torrents.
On the left of the lake is Martindale Bay; and on the right are the craggy steeps of Helvellyn, and other rugged eminences.
A little below Watermillock stands Beau Thorn, a lovely spot, which is sheltered from the winds by a thriving plantation of white thorns, whence the name is derived.
Half a mile further you pass Lemon House, which fronts the opening into Martindale Fell; and close by it, under Little Mell Fell, is a new-built house belonging to the Rev.
Mr. Hutchinson.
The road now skirts for a quarter of a mile along the margin of the lake, from which it is occasionally excluded from the sight by intervening eminences, till you come to Old Church, a farm-house so called from its being erected on the site of an ancient church or chapel.
Opposite is a fine view of the bleak, barren, and almost perpendicular mountain of Swarth Fell, memorable for the providential escape of the late Edward Hasell, esq., father of the present owner of Dalemain.
Being in a fox-chase upon its summit, he was inadvertently led into a situation which rendered it impossible for him to return.
He therefore dismounted, and pressed as closely as possible to his horse; and thus, supporting each other down the perilous side of this mountain, they arrived safely at the bottom, in the presence of numerous spectators.
No person is known to have descended this mountain either before or since that time.
The horse is remembered, as well as the man; and White Stockings was permitted to range at ease during the rest of her life, with the best fodder and attention which a grateful master could bestow.
Down this mountain, Swarth Beck pours its tributary stream into Ullswater.
When the brook is full of water it forms numerous cascades, which fall in different gradations down the hollow craggy rocks, till the brook precipitates itself into the lake.
It is said that the noise of these falls, which is very considerable, may be heard at the distance of two miles, and is reverberated from rock to rock in a thousand different tones.
On some elevated grounds, near the village of Watermillock, you obtain a delightful view of the lake and its accompaniments.
At Skillingnab, a bold promontory, the lake is contracted to a span, but soon again spreads itself, and forms a variety of sweet bays and promontories.
About a mile from Watermillock, you enter Gowbarrow Park.
The middle reach of the lake appears at once, and discovers a fine sheet of water three miles in length, and in some parts more than three - quarters of a mile in breadth, with its winding shores and numerous inlets.
The rugged mountains to the west rise in terrific grandeur, and above all the steep Helvellyn shows his sovereign head.
The road leads for about three miles through Gowbarrow Park, its course being contiguous to the shore, and generally through groves of trees and brushwood, which form the most delightful vistas.
The waters of the lake shine like a mirror, and appear doubly beautiful when partially seen through these opening.
Sometimes the thickets dilate so as to afford a full view.
The opposite mountains of Birk Fell and Place Fell present craggy and generally naked surfaces, and rise rapidly from the edge of the waters.
On this side the mountains ascend more gradually, and leave a space of low ground along the margin of the lake.
In Gowbarrow Park is Lyulph's Tower, which was a hunting-seat of the late Duke of Norfolk, and was bequeathed by him to Mr. Howard, of Corby Castle.
It stands in a delightful situation; is a square rugged edifice, with four towers, battlements, and gothic windows; and was erected partly as an object to the surrounding scenery.
It is supposed to have been denominated from Lyulphus, an Anglo Saxon of distinction, who was murdered during the disturbances at the Conquest, and whose monument( it is said) still remains in the church at Chester Le-street, near Durham.
The views of the lake seen from this station both to the north and west, including the surrounding mountains, exhibit a soft and harmonious beauty.
The intervention of trees, villages, and scattered habitations, refreshes the eye; and the picture is beautified and enriched by occasional luxuriancy.
The park, within which Lyulph's Tower is situated, contains upwards of one thousand eight hundred acres, and is pastured by six hundred deer, besides a number of sheep and black cattle.
From Lyulph's Tower is a delightful winding and uneven walk up the rocky vale to the waterfall called Airey's force.
This cascade is the entire work of nature, and the water rushes from the summit of a wooded cliff through a rocky chink, about eighty feet in perpendicular height, and sixteen in width; the spray arising from it forming two or three concentric rainbows. "
We clambered," says a tourist," to the highest point of the rock, whence the fall commenced, and seizing the branch of a tree, which hung over the craggy cheeks of the bank, were struck, upon looking down into the yawning deep, with the perpendicular narrow channel which the continual dashing of the water had excavated in the solid stone.
The view itself was exceedingly terrific, and we powerfully felt-- "-- How fearful And dizzy' tis to cast one's eye so low."
The word force is in these parts the common name for a waterfall.
At the upper end of the park, the last reach of the lake, is a piece of water-scenery, which can scarcely be surpassed in grandeur, and which displays itself to the eye in a majestic sweep around Place Fell, a lofty mountain on the opposite shore.
This fine expanse is spotted with four islands.
Its shores are bold, rocky, woody, and indented with bays.
The sweetly secluded farm of Glencoyn appears on the right with its house embowered in trees, and standing under a range of rocks, which command a fine view of the middle bend of the lake.
Stybarrow Crag next presents itself, a lofty mountain, deeply scarred by winds and torrents, with oaks growing out of its interstices.
The road lies beneath this crag, and commands a lovely view of the lake.
The pass at Stybarrow Crag has an impending mountain on one side, and on the other the steep bank of the lake, which is here said to be very deep.
We might easily imagine that the situation of Stybarrow Crag, with the deep waters of Ullswater on the one hand, and" the mighty Helvellyn" on the other, had given rise to the following description by Mr. Walter Scott, which certainly pourtrays with great accuracy this celebrated pass: At length they came where stern and steep, The hills sink down upon the deep.
Here Vennachar in silver flows, There ridge on ridge Benledi rose; Ever the hollow path twined on, Beneath steep bank and threatening stone; An hundred men might hold the post With hardihood against a host.
The rugged mountain's scanty cloak Was dwarfish shrubs of birch and oak, With shingles bare, and cliffs between, And patches bright of bracken green, And heather black, that waved so high, It held the copse in rivalry.
But where the lake slept deep and still, Dank osiers fringed the swamp and hill, And oft both path and hill were torn, Where wintry torrent down had borne, And heaped upon the cumbered land Its wreck of gravel, rocks, and sand.
Lady of the Lake.
A little beyond Stybarrow, on the left of the road, is a pretty summer-house, wholly constructed with straw-matting, of remarkably elegant workmanship; and the lining, floor, and seats of it, are all of the same material.
A winding path communicates between it and the handsome modern-built house of the Rev.
H. Askew, the incumbent and patron of the rectory of Graystock.
This house is embosomed in thriving plantations of larch and fir trees, and the grounds are laid out with taste.
Nearly opposite to Stybarrow Crag is Cherry Island, a small rocky islet, covered with a few shrubs.
The road now winds around the head of Ullswater, and brings you to the village of Patterdale.
From a rock immediately behind the public-house in Patterdale is a fine view of the last reach of the lake.
Pastures and cultivated fields constitute the fore-ground.
On the right is Martindale Fell, a rocky woody mountain, which impends over Patterdale; and on the left a range of steep rocks ornamented with trees.
Gowbarrow Park, rising majestically from the margin of the lake, forms the back ground, and a beautiful expanse of water, decorated with islands, fills the middle space of this delightful picture.
To the preceding description we shall add the observations of Mr. Gilpin and Mr. Arthur Young on the Lake of Ullswater. "
As we descended a little further," says Mr. Gilpin," the whole scene of the lake opened before us, and such a scene as almost drew from us the apostrophe of the enraptured bard: " Visions of glory, spare my aching sight!"
Among all the visions of this enchanting country, we had seen nothing so beautifully sublime, so correctly picturesque as this.
Mr. Gilpin visited the lake from Matterdale. "
Ullswater spreads every where in an easy curve, beautifully broken in some parts by promontories. "
The middle reach contains in length near two - thirds of the lake.
The southern side is mountainous, and becomes more so as it verges towards the west.
As the mountains approach the north, they glide( as we have seen is usual in boundary lakes) into meadows and pastures.
The northern and western sides contain a variety of woody and rocky scenes, but these also, as they approach the east, become smooth and fertilized.
At the southern point, under impending mountains, lies the village of Patterdale.
The fore-ground before us is part of Gowbarrow Park, rough, broken, and woody.
Among the old oaks which enrich it, herds of deer and cattle graze in groups.
Beyond this is spread an extensive reach of the lake, winding round a rocky promontory on the left, which is the point of a mountain called Martindale Fell, or Place Fell, the southern boundary of the lake. "
Such was the disposition of the objects on the left of the lake: on the right, two woody promontories, pursuing each other in perspective, made a beautiful contrast with the smooth continuity of Martindale Fell.
In front, the distance was composed of mountains falling gently into the lake: near the edge of which lies the village Patterdale. "
As we left Gowbarrow Park, we took our route along the margin of the first of those woody promontories on the right.
We were carried by the side of the lake through close lanes and thick groves; yet not so thick, but that we had every where, through the opening of the trees and windings of the road, views in front and on the right, into woody recesses, some of which are very pleasing, and on the left the lake and all its distinct furniture broke frequently upon us. "
After skirting the first woody promontory, which carried us about a mile, the road turned suddenly to the right, and led us round into the second, rising a considerable height above the water.
In this promontory a new scene opened, the woods became intermixed with rock, and a great variety of beautiful foregrounds were produced. "
Having now almost skirted the two woody promontories, in our route to Patterdale, we found the conclusion the grandest part of the whole scenery.
It is a bold projection of rock, finely marked and adorned with hanging woods; under the beetling summit of which, the road makes a sudden turn.
This is the point of the second promontory, and I believe is known by the name of Stybarrow Crag.
The trees which compose the scenery through both these promontories are, in general, the oak.
From hence, through lanes of the same kind, though less superbly decorated, we came to the village of Patterdale, situated on rising grounds, among two or three little rivers, or branches of rivers, which feed the lake.
It lies in a cove of mountains, open in front to the southern reach of the lake, beyond which appear the high woody lands of Gowbarrow Park.
The situation is magnificent."
" Our next expedition," says Mr. Young," was to Ullswater, a very fine lake, about six miles from Penrith: the approach to it is very beautiful; the most advantageous way of seeing it is to take the road up Dunmallet, for you rise up a very beautiful hill, and see nothing of the water till you gain the summit, when the view is uncommonly beautiful.
You look down at once upon the sheet of the lake, which appears prodigiously fine.
It is an oblong water, cut by islands, three miles in length; and a mile and a half broad in some places, in others a mile.
It is inclosed with an amphitheatre of hills, in front at the end of the reach, projecting down to the water-edge, but retiring from it on each side, so as to leave a space of cultivated inclosures between the feet and the lake.
The hedges that divide them are scattered with trees; and the fields of grass and corn, waving in beautiful slopes from the water, intersected by hedges in the most picturesque manner. "
Upon the right a bold swelling hill of turf rises with a fine air of grandeur.
Another view from the hill is on a mountain's side, which presents to the eye a swelling slope of turf, and over it Saddleback rises in a noble style.
Another view from this hill is down upon a beautiful vale of cultivated inclosures; Mr. Hasell's house at Dalemain, in one part, almost encompassed with a plantation.
Here you likewise catch some meanders of the river through the trees, and hear the roar of a waterfall.
This hill itself is a very fine object, viewed every way, but the simplicity of its effect is destroyed by being cut by a double stripe of Scotch firs across it, which varies the colour of the verdure, and consequently breaks the unity of the view.
Mr. Gilpin considers the hill of Dunmallet as no ornament in the landscape.
He says," At the end of the lake stands Dunmallet, a remarkable hill, which overlooks the first reach, but is itself rather a disgusting object, shaped with conic exactness: cut as uniformly into walks, verging to a centre, it becomes a vile termination of a noble view."
" Another point of view from which this part of the lake is seen to good advantage is from Soulby Fell.
You look down upon the water, which spreads very finely to the view, bounded to the right by the hills, which rise from the very water; on the other, by Dunmallet Hill, in front by a fine range of inclosures, rising most beautifully to the view, and the water's edge skirted by trees, in the most picturesque manner. "
Directing your course under the lake, and landing at Swarth Fell, the next business should be to mount its height.
The lake winds at your feet like a noble river; the opposite banks, beautiful inclosures, exquisitely fringed with trees, and narrow slips, like promontories, jut into it in the most picturesque effect imaginable; and at the same time, you hear the noise of a waterfall, but unseen. "
Taking boat again, and sailing with the course of the lake, you turn with its bend, and come into a very fine sheet of water, which appears like a lake of itself.
It is under Howtown and Hallen Fell.
The environs here are very striking; cultivated inclosures on one side, crowned with the tops of hills; and, on the other, a woody craggy hill down to the very water's edge.
The effect is fine. "
Next you double Hallen Fell, and come again into a new sheet of water, under Martindale Fell, which is a prodigious fine hill, of a bold abrupt form; and between that and Hallen Fell, a little rising wave of cultivated inclosures, skirted with trees, the fields of the finest verdure, and the picturesque appearance of the whole most exquisitely pleasing.
It is a most delicious spot, with an amphitheatre of rugged hills. "
Following the bend of water under New Crag, the views are more romantic than in any part hitherto seen.
New Crag to the right rears a bold abrupt head, in a style truly sublime; and, passing it a little, the opposite shore is very noble.
Martindale Fell rises steep from the water's edge, and presents a bold wall of mountain, really glorious.
In front the hills are craggy, broken, and irregular in shape( not in height), like those of Keswick.
They project so boldly to the very water, that the outlet, or winding of the water, is shut by them from the eye.
It seems inclosed by a shore of steep hills and crags.
From hence to the end of the lake, which is sprinkled by three or four small islands, the views are, in the same style, very wild and romantic."
At the head of the lake is Patterdale Hall, a handsome modern-built mansion belonging to John Mounsey, esq., whose character and that of his amiable family highly merit respect.
This mansion is surrounded by thriving plantations, which, together with the lofty mountains behind, completely shelter it from the stormy blast.
At the end of a well formed shrubbery, through which is the approach to the house, a lovely garden presents itself, and in front of this a lawn slopes to the road.
The ancestors of Mr. Mounsey have been distinguished by the appellation of kings of Patterdale, probably, as tradition says, on account of a gallant action performed by one of the family; who, at the head of a few trusty shepherds, defeated at the pass of Stybarrow Crag a numerous band of Scotch marauders that were ravaging these peaceful plains.
It is much to be regretted, that tourists should sometimes in their rambles insert observations on persons and characters which give pain to the friends and relations of the persons so remarked on.
We are glad, however, to find that the amiable and pleasing author of A Fortnight's Ramble to the Lakes has had the candour and good sense to expunge from his pages observations which, in the first edition of his book, were calculated to cause pain in some worthy minds.
The church of Patterdale is an ancient white structure, furnished with oaken benches.
In the churchyard is a venerable old yew tree, of amazing circumference, with embers of life still remaining: it is completely hollow in the trunk; but its branches are still long and vigorous, though they do not cover so large a space as formerly; and from its centre a healthy young tree has sprung.
No" storied urns or animated busts" present themselves in this churchyard, which does not contain a single gravestone.
The peaceful inhabitants of this dale are content to rest with their forefathers with one green clod to cover them, which may be in perfection when tombs shall be no more.
-- In our churchyard Is neither epitaph nor monument, Tombstone nor name-- only the turf we tread, And a few natural graves.
-- Wordsworth.
It is dedicated to St. Patrick, from which circumstance Patterdale probably received its name, being apparently a corruption of Patrick's dale.
There is also near the road, and a little below Mr. Mounsey's house, a fine spring, called St. Patrick's well.
The following extraordinary passages in the life of the Rev.
Mr. Mattinson, a former curate of Patterdale, are deserving of notice.
He buried his mother; he married and buried his father; he christened his wife, and published his own banns of marriage in the church; and he christened and married all his four children, a son and three daughters.
He died January 31, 1766, at the age of ninety - six years, sixty of which he had been curate of Patterdale.
Till the last years of his life his stipend did not exceed 12 l., and never reached 20 l. per annum; yet such was his industry and domestic economy, that on this small pittance he contrived to live comfortably and to save a thousand pounds.
A little above the inn in Patterdale is Goldrill Bridge, where is another beautiful view of the surrounding scenery.
Pursuing the road which leads towards Ambleside, you pass the River Goldrill twice in its gambols through the valley.
At length, leaving the village of Hartsop on the left, you come in sight of Brotherwater, a small lake, which is said to have derived its name from the circumstance of two brothers having been unfortunately drowned in it many years ago.
The road from Patterdale to this lake is pleasant and easy, and winds through level meadows adjacent to hanging woods and lofty mountains, down which pour numerous streams.
The sound of these streams is sometimes driven full on the ear; and at other times it is scarcely audible, except when re-echoed from the opposite side.
It is not unusual for one part of the mountain to be enveloped in a dark shade, while another presents the brightest colour which the oblique rays of the sun can impart; and when sheep are seen grazing upon the mountain, the landscape becomes most beautifully picturesque.
Some travellers pursue the road from Brotherwater to Ambleside, which is truly an alpine pass, winding in a contracted vale, with a high and naked mountain on the left.
A steep and rugged path ascends to the heights of Kirkstone, meeting the noisy waters of a raging torrent tumbling over its rocky channel.
From Patterdale to Ambleside is ten miles; but we cannot recommend this route to those who wish to make a complete tour of the lakes.
The rocks of Ullswater and its vicinity are justly celebrated for the grandeur and variety of their echoes.
These, indeed, more or less accompany all lakes which are surrounded with lofty mountains; but the echoes excited in different parts of this lake are peculiarly grand.
On discharging a cannon at the head of Ullswater, at a time when the atmosphere was perfectly serene, it is said that six or seven echoes have been distinctly heard and enumerated.
At first, it rolled over the head in one vast peal; then, subsiding for a few seconds, it rose in a grand interrupted burst on the right, over Place Fell and Birk Fell; after a solemn pause, the sound rose again in front, over Gowbarrow Park and the mountains which rise behind it; and thence over the rocks which skirt the western side of the lake, until it reached Helvellyn, and was lost in the mountains behind Patterdale.
Thus thrown from rock to rock, in a sort of aerial perspective, it is caught again by some nearer promontory, and, returning full on the ear, surprises you after you thought all had been over, with as great a peal as at first.
Mr. Gilpin thus describes these wonderful echoes:--" The grandest effect of this kind is produced by a successive discharge of cannon, at the interval of a few seconds between each discharge.
The effect of the first is not over, when the echoes of the second, the third, and perhaps the fourth begin.
Such a variety of awful sounds, mixing and commixing, and at the same time heard from all sides, have a wonderful effect on the mind; as if the foundations of every rock on the lake were giving way; and the whole scene, from some strange convulsion, were falling into general ruin.
But there is another species of echoes, which are as well adapted to the lake in all its stillness and tranquility, as the others are to its wildness and confusion; and which recommend themselves chiefly to those feelings, which depend on the graver movements of the mind.
Instead of cannon, let a few French horns and clarionets be introduced.
Softer music than such loud wind-instruments would scarce have power to vibrate.
The effect is now wonderfully changed.
The sound of cannon is heard in bursts.
It is the modified music of thunder.
But the continuation of musical sounds forms a continuation of musical echoes, which reverberating around the lake, are exquisitely melodious in their several gradations, and form a thousand symphonies, playing together from every part.
The variety of notes is inconceivable.
The ear is not equal to their innumerable combinations.
It listens to a symphony dying away at a distance, when other melodious sounds arise near at hand.
These have scarcely attracted the attention, when a different mode of harmony arises from another quarter.
In short, every rock is vocal, and the whole lake is transformed into a kind of magical scene, in which every promontory seems peopled by aerial beings, answering each other in celestial music."
-- How often from the steep Of echoing hills, or thickets, have we heard Celestial voices to the midnight air, Sole, or responsive each to other's note, Singing their great Creator?
Oft in bands While they keep watch, or nightly rounding walk, With heavenly touch of instrumental sounds In full harmonic number joined, their songs Divide the night, and lift our thoughts to heaven.
Paradise Lost.
Of all the lakes, Ullswater is confessedly the grandest and most beautiful, and affords the greatest variety of views, in which, however, the sublime preponderates. "
Much as I admired the other lakes," says the author of the Fortnight's Ramble," I cannot help giving preference to Ullswater: every arm presents new beauties-- Helvellyn-- the interior mountains-- the village and plain of Patterdale-- Place Fell-- the islands-- the tower-- Gowbarrow Park-- the vale of Martindale-- the rough mountains and the fertile ones-- Dunmallet Head-- Yes!
every house, from Watermillock to the poorest cottage, appears in its proper place, without displeasing the eye by attempts at finery; and there is a chasteness about the whole, that makes it the choicest gift of Nature I ever saw."
The traveller may return to Penrith by the same road which conducted him to Patterdale; or if he think proper, he may take a nearer and more direct road to Keswick, by way of Dacre, leaving Dacre Castle on the right.
By this route he will enter the Penrith road near Hutton John, an old castle-like mansion on the left, about ten miles from Keswick.
Penrith is about eighteen miles from Keswick.
At the twelfth mile-stone from Keswick is a view of Graystock Castle, a seat belonging to Mr. Howard, a relative of the late Duke of Norfolk.
After leaving Penruddock, you descend through the peaceful vales of Grisdale and Threlkeld, on the right of which are Saddleback, and on the left a heavy dull mountain, branching from the mighty Helvellyn, whose summit is seen towering in the airy regions.
Vale Of St. John.
Nothing very interesting is observable, till, passing the village of Threlkeld, the beautiful vale of St. John opens obliquely to the view.
This secluded valley, which is situated about four miles from the town of Keswick, deserves a visit from every admirer of romantic beauty.
On approaching it, you are struck with the appearance of an ancient fortress in ruins, which rises from the summit of a small eminence, amidst an amphitheatre of mountains. "
This massive bulwark," observes a respectable writer," shows a front of various towers, and makes an awful, rude, and gothic appearance, with its lofty turrets and ragged battlements; we traced the galleries, the bending arches, the buttresses.
The greatest antiquity stands characterized in its architecture; the inhabitants near it assert it to be an antediluvian structure. "
The traveller's curiosity is roused, and he prepares to make a nearer approach, when that curiosity is put upon the rack, by being assured that, if he advances, certain genii who govern the place, by their supernatural arts, will strip it of all its beauties, and by enchantment transform the magic walls.
The vale seems adapted for the habitation of such beings-- its gloomy recesses and retirements look like the haunts of evil spirits.
There was no delusion in the report; we were soon convinced of its truth; for this piece of antiquity, so venerable and noble in its aspect, as we drew near, changed its figure, and proved no other than a shaken massive pile of rocks, which stand in the midst of this little vale, disunited from the surrounding mountains, and have so much the real form and resemblance of a castle, that they bear the name of the Castle Rock of St.
John's."
Hutchinson's Excursion to the Lakes.
This vale was the scene of a tremendous desolation, occasioned by the discharge of a waterspout, on August 22, 1749.
The rain fell in such quantities as to overflow the brooks and completely deluge the valley, in many parts carrying away the soil; but the greatest alarm was excited by the confinement of the water, which, accumulating in the interstices of the mountains, at length overcame every resistance, tore up huge masses of solid rock, and, menacing universal destruction, swept away trees, houses, inhabitants, and cattle.
A singular providence, however, protected many lives.
A little school, where all the youth of the neighbourhood were educated, was at the instant the spout burst crowded with its flock, and stood in the very line of one of these torrents; but the hand of Providence miraculously stayed a rolling rock in the midst of its course, which would otherwise have swept away the whole tenement with its inmates; and by the interposition of the rock, the floods were divided, and passed on each side, insulating the school-house, and leaving the pupils with their master, trembling at once for the dangers escaped, and as spectators of the dreadful havock in the valley, and of the tremendous waters which encompassed them on every side. "
Druidical Temple."
In a field adjoining the road from Penrith to Keswick, about a mile and a half from the latter place, is a Druid Temple, which is too interesting an object to pass unnoticed.
This venerable relic of British antiquity consists of an arrangement of rude stones, some of which stand upright, but many have fallen, and others are leaning obliquely.
The whole number of these stones is fifty, of which forty are disposed in an oval form, in an area of thirty - four yards from north to south, and nearly thirty from east to west.
The other ten stones form a rectangular recess, or oblong square, supposed to have been the sacred place, exclusively appropriated to the Druids, where they met, separated from the vulgar, to perform their rites, or to sit in council in civil or criminal affairs.
It is impossible to tread this hallowed circle, where the Druids offered their adorations to the Deity, and decided on the lives and liberties of their fellow creatures, without feeling a mixture of awe and veneration: Skirted with unhewn stone, it awes my soul As if the very genius of the place Himself appeared, and with terrific tread Stalked through this drear domain.
Mason.
There is scarcely a single object in the scene that interrupts the solemn tone of feeling, impressed by its general character of profound solitude, greatness, and awful wildness.
Castlerigg is the central point of three valleys, that immediately escape the observation of the eye, and whose mountains form part of an amphitheatre, which is completed by those of Derwent Water on the west, and by the precipices of Skiddaw and Saddleback on the north.
These dark rocks are thrown into every form and direction that fancy could suggest, and are at that distance which allows grandeur to prevail.
Such seclusion and sublimity were indeed well suited to the deep and wild mysteries of the Druids.
Here, at midnight, every Druid, summoned by the terrible horn, never awakened but on high occasions, and descending from his mountain or secret cave, might assemble without intrusion from one sacrilegious footstep, and celebrate a festival, By rites of such strange potency, As, done in open day, would dim the sun, Though enthroned in noontide brightness.
Mason.
He crossed his brow beside the stone, Where Druids erst heard victims groan, And at the cairns upon the wild, O er many a heathen hero piled, He breathed a timid prayer for those Who died ere Shiloh's sun arose.
Scott's Lord of the Isles. "
Keswick."
Keswick is a small town, pleasantly situated on the eastern side of an extensive and fertile vale, and on the northern extremity of the celebrated lake of Derwent Water.
This place contains about two hundred houses, most of which are built of a stone called blue rag, and covered with blue slate.
The general appearance of the town is not calculated to impress a traveller with an idea of the opulence of the inhabitants.
The houses in general are low and incommodious, the streets narrow and ill-paved; and the market-place is very confined, and disfigured by a mean town-hall, and by still meaner shambles.
On the bell of the town-hall is the date 1001.
By some called schistic earth, or whinstone, and by others lava.
Mr. Adam Walker supposes it to be a kind of basaltes.
Keswick received the privileges of a market as early as the reign of Edward I., on an application from Thomas Derwentwater, lord of the place, from whom the manor descended by inheritance to the Ratcliffs.
The unfortunate nobleman who lost his life on Tower Hill, in 1716, was the last of the family.
The market is held on Saturday; the chief articles exposed to sale are butcher's - meat, and a variety of fresh-water fish.
This town had once a considerable fair for the sale of leather; but since the establishment of a market at Settle, in Yorkshire, the whole of this trade has disappeared.
The manufactures now chiefly carried on at Keswick are coarse woolen goods, blankets, kerseys,&amp; c. The poor-house, founded and endowed by Sir John Banks, Chief Justice in the Court of Common Pleas in the reign of King Charles I., and a native of this place, is a commodious and substantial edifice, and well calculated to answer all the purposes of its benevolent founder.
Here are two museums, which should be visited by every tourist: one was established in 1779 by the late Mr. Peter Crosthwaite, an ingenious native of this parish, and is now shewn by his son; the other was collected some years ago by Mr. Hutton.
The proprietors of these museums are intelligent guides; and both museums contain specimens of almost every variety of the mineral substances found in Cumberland, together with numerous kinds of plants, British and Roman antiquities, coins, and other rarities both British and foreign.
The church of Keswick, properly called Crosthwaite Church, is a handsome edifice, situated about a mile north of the town, and containing a few old monuments.
The vicarage-house, seated upon an eminence, between the church and the town, commands a beautiful view of the lake and the surrounding mountain scenery.
This is the situation with which Gray, the poet, was so much enraptured. "
From hence," says he," I got to the parsonage a little before sun-set, and saw a picture, that if I could transmit to you, and fix it in all the softness of its living colours, would fairly sell for one thousand pounds."
From its central situation, Keswick may be considered as the metropolis of the lakes: it is much frequented by tourists, for whose accommodation there are two respectable inns, the Royal Oak and the Queen's Head. "
Derwent Water."
This beautiful lake is of an oblong form, being about three miles in length, and one and a half in breadth.
It may be seen to advantage, either by sailing on it, or by traversing its borders.
There is an excellent road on each side, which, in some parts, is considerably elevated, and in others is nearly on a level with the surface of the water.
The depth of Derwent Water varies from three to ten or eleven fathoms; and it derives its principal supplies of water from the rivers Lowdore and Derwent, the latter of which flows through it, and has given its name to the lake.
By some this has been supposed to be the finest lake in the north of England; but, for grandeur and sublimity, Ullswater is now allowed to claim the pre-eminence.
Fantastic wildness and romantic beauty are the leading characteristics of Derwent Water, which has this decided advantage over all the other lakes, that it immediately appears to be what it really is.
As the breadth of the lake bears so inconsiderable a proportion to its length, it nearly retains its form from whatever point it is viewed; and this is a distinction peculiar to itself.
The dark frowning Skiddaw forms its northern boundary, and seems to rise immediately behind it, though distant at least one mile and a half.
One long mountain, part of Derwent Fells, along which the road forms a fine terrace, reaches nearly the whole of its western border; but the pride of this lake is the head, where the mountains of Borrowdale bound the prospect in a manner singularly grand. "
The whole," to borrow the faithful description of Mrs. Radcliffe," is seen at one glance, expanding within an amphitheatre of mountains, rocky, but not vast, broken into many fantastic shapes, peaked, splintered, impending, sometimes pyramidal, opening by narrow valleys to the view of rocks, that rise immediately beyond, and are again overlooked by others.
The precipices seldom overshoot the water, but are arranged at some distance, and the shores swell with woody eminences, or sink into green, pastoral margins.
Masses of wood also frequently appear among the cliffs, feathering them to their summits, and a white cottage sometimes peeps from out their skirts, seated on the smooth knoll of a pasture, projecting to the lake, and looks so exquisitely picturesque, as to seem placed there purposely to adorn it.
The lake in return faithfully reflects the whole picture, and so even and brilliantly translucent is its surface, that it rather brightens than obscures the colouring."
Crow Park is a gentle eminence adjoining the lake, and not three hundred yards from the town of Keswick.
It was formerly shaded with large oak trees; but is now a fertile pasture, and commands one of the finest views of this delightful vale.
Cockshut Hill, at a short distance from Crow Park, was once a celebrated station, whence the lake appeared to great advantage; but the prospect is now obstructed by a plantation of trees.
Lord's Island was formerly a seat of the Ratcliff family, who derived their title of Earl of Derwent Water from the lake.
This island contains about five acres.
It was formerly a peninsula; but, after it came into the possession of the Ratcliff family, it was severed from the main land by a ditch, over which a drawbridge was thrown.
In consequence of the activity of the last Earl in the rebellion of 1715, it became forfeited, together with the other estates of that family in the neighbourhood, and is at present vested in trustees for the benefit of Greenwich Hospital.
Vicar's Island contains six acres, and was formerly ornamented on its eastern side by a beautiful grove of sycamores, embowering an humble cottage.
But the sycamore grove is now no more; and on the ruins of the lonely cot appears a glaring edifice, which violates the simplicity of the scene.
This island has latterly been called Pocklington's Island, from the name of its late proprietor; but it certainly ought to be denominated Vicar's Island, as it apparently received that name from its having formerly belonged to Fountains Abbey, in Yorkshire.
St. Herbert's Island contains about four acres, and is situated near the centre of the lake.
It obtained its name from St. Herbert, a priest and confessor, who, about the middle of the seventh century, made it his lonely abode.
The remains of his hermitage are still visible, being built of stone and mortar, and formed into two apartments, one of which, about twenty feet long and sixteen feet wide, seems to have been his chapel; the other, of less dimensions, his cell.
Near these hallowed ruins, the later Sir Wilfred Lawson( to whose representative the island at present belongs) erected some years ago a small octagonal cottage, which, being built of unhewn stone and artificially mossed over, has a venerable appearance. "
If a painter," says Mr. Gilpin," were desirous to study the whole circumference of the lake, from one station, St. Herbert's Island is the spot he should choose, from whence, as from a centre, he might see it in rotation."
He was particularly distinguished for his friendship to St. Cuthbert; and, according to a legendary tale, at the intercession of St. Herbert, they both expired on the same day, and in the same hour and minute.
This tale has furnished to Mr. Wordsworth a subject for a beautiful inscription for the site of St. Herbert's Hermitage, in which are the following lines:-- -- When within his cave Alone he knelt before the crucifix, While over the lake the cataract of Lowdore Pealed to his orisons, and when he paced Along the beach of this small isle and thought Of his companion, he would pray that both,( Now that their earthly duties were fulfilled,) Might die in the same moment.
Nor in vain So prayed he:-- as our chronicles report, Though here the hermit numbered his last day, Far from St. Cuthbert his beloved friend, Those holy men both died in the same hour.
The lake of Derwentwater has been described with great accuracy by some of our late tour-writers; and few of its beauties have been left unnoticed.
The following description by Mr. Pennant has great merit:-- " Arrive near the Elysium of the north, the vale of Keswick, a circuit between land and water, of about twenty miles.
From an eminence above, command a fine bird's eye view of the whole of the broad fertile plain, the town of Keswick, the white church of Crosthwaite, the boasted lake of Derwentwater, and the beginning of that of Bassenthwaite, with a full sight of the vast circumjacent mountains that guard this delicious spot. "
Take boat on the water, which makes this place so justly celebrated.
The form is irregular, extending from north to south about three miles and a half; the breadth one and a half.
The greatest depth is twenty feet in a channel running from end to end, probably formed by the River Derwent, which passes through, and gives name to the lake. "
The views on every side are very different; here all the possible variety of alpine scenery is exhibited with all the horror of precipice, broken crag, or overhanging rock; or insulated pyramidal hills, contrasted with others whose smooth and verdant sides, swelling into immense aerial heights, at once please and surprise the eye. "
The two extremes of the lake afford the most discordant prospects: the southern is a composition of all that is horrible; an immense chasm opens in the midst, whose entrance is divided by a rude conic hill, once topt with a castle, the habitation of the tyrant of the rocks; beyond, a series of broken mountainous crags, now patched with snow, soar one above the other, overshadowing the dark winding deeps of Borrowdale.
In these bleak recesses are lodged variety of minerals, the origin of evil by their abuse. "
But the opposite or northern view is in all respects a strong and beautiful contrast.
Skiddaw shows its vast base, and bounding all that part of the vale, rises gently to a height that sinks the neighbouring hills, opens a pleasing front, smooth and verdant, smiling over the country like a generous lord, while the fells of Borrowdale frown over it like a hardened tyrant. "
Each boundary of the lake seems to take part with the extremities, and emulates their appearance; the southern varies in rocks of different forms, from the tremendous precipices of the Lady's Leap, the broken front of the Falcon's Nest, to the more distant concave or curvature of Lowdore, an extent of precipitous rock, with trees vegetating from the numerous fissures, and the foam of a cataract precipitating amidst. "
The entrance into Borrowdale divides the scene, and the northern side alters into milder forms; a salt spring, once the property of the monks of Furness, trickles along the shore; hills( the resort of shepherds) with downy fronts and lofty summits succeed; with woods closing their bases even to the water's edge.
Not far from hence the environs appear to the navigator of the lake to the greatest advantage, for on every side mountains close the prospect, and form an amphitheatre almost matchless. "
Loch Lomond in Scotland, and Loch Lene in Ireland, are powerful rivals to the lake in question: were a native of either of these kingdoms to demand my opinion of their respective beauties, I must answer as the subtile Melvil did the vain Elizabeth; that she was the fairest person in England, and mine the fairest in Scotland. "
The isles that decorate the water are few, but finely disposed and very distinct, rise with gentle and regular curvatures above the surface, consist of verdant turf, or are planted with various trees.
The lake is subject to violent agitations, and often without any apparent cause, as was the case this day; the weather was calm, yet the waves ran a great height, and the boat was tossed violently with what is called a bottom wind."
The lake and vale of Keswick have been described with great precision and elegance by the late Dr. Brown, in the following letter to Lord Lyttleton, dated 1767.
A more masterly delineation of local scenery has, perhaps, never appeared. "
In my way to the north, from Hagley, I passed through Dovedale; and, to say the truth, was disappointed in it.
When I came to Buxton, I visited another or two of their romantic scenes; but these are inferior to Dovedale.
They are but poor miniatures of Keswick; which exceeds them more in grandeur than I can give you to imagine; and more, if possible, in beauty than in grandeur. "
Instead of the narrow slip of valley which is seen at Dovedale, you have at Keswick a vast amphitheatre, in circumference about twenty miles.
Instead of a meagre rivulet, a noble living lake, ten miles round, of an oblong form, adorned with a variety of wooded islands.
The rocks, indeed, of Dovedale, are finely wild, pointed, and irregular; but the hills are both little and unanimated; and the margin of the brook is poorly edged with weeds, morass, and brushwood.
But at Keswick you will, on one side of the lake, see a rich and beautiful landscape of cultivated fields, rising to the eye in fine inequalities, with noble groves of oak, happily dispersed, and climbing the adjacent hills, shade above shade, in the most various and picturesque forms.
On the opposite shore, you will find rocks and cliffs of stupendous height, hanging broken over the lake in horrible grandeur, some of them a thousand feet high, the woods climbing up their steep and shaggy sides, where mortal foot never yet approached.
On these dreadful heights the eagles build their nests; a variety of water-falls are seen pouring from their summits, and falling in vast sheets from rock to rock in rude and terrible magnificence; while on all sides of this immense amphitheatre the lofty mountains rise round, piercing the clouds in shapes as spiry and fantastic as the very rocks of Dovedale.
To this I must add, the frequent and bold projection of the cliffs into the lake, forming noble bays and promontories: in other parts they finely retire from it, and open in abrupt chasms or cliffs, through which, at hand, you see rich and cultivated vales, and beyond these, at various distances, mountains rising over mountains; among which, new prospects present themselves in mist, till the eye is lost in an agreeable perplexity; Where active fancy travels beyond sense, And pictures things unseen.
-- " Were I to analyse the two places into their constituent principles, I should tell you that the full perfection of Keswick consists of three circumstances, beauty, horror, and immensity united; the second of which is alone found in Dovedale.
Of beauty it hath little; nature having left it almost a desert: neither its small extent, nor the diminutive and lifeless form of the hills, admits magnificence.
But to give you a complete idea of these three perfections, as they are joined in Keswick, would require the united powers of Claude, Salvator, and Poussin.
The first should throw his delicate sun-shine over the cultivated vales, the scattered cots, the groves, the lake, and wooded islands.
The second should dash out the horror of the rugged cliffs, the steeps, the hanging woods, and foaming waterfalls; while the grand pencil of Poussin should crown the whole with the majesty of the impending mountains.
So much for what I would call the permanent beauties of this astonishing scene.
Were I not afraid of being tiresome, I could now dwell as long on its varying or accidental beauties.
I would sail round the lake, anchor in every bay, and land you on every promontory and island.
would point out the perpetual change of prospect; the woods, rocks, cliffs, and mountains, by turns vanishing, or rising into view: now gaining on the sight, hanging over our heads in their full dimensions, beautifully dreadful; and now by a change of situation, assuming new romantic shapes, retiring and lessening on the eye, insensibly losing themselves in an azure mist.
I would remark the contrast of light and shade, produced by the morning and evening sun; the one gilding the western, and the other the eastern side of this immense amphitheatre; while the vast shadow, projected by the mountains, buries the opposite part in a deep and purple gloom, which the eye can hardly penetrate.
The natural variety of colouring which the several objects produce is no less wonderful and pleasing; the ruling tints in the valley being those of azure, green and gold, yet ever various, arising from the intermixture of the lake, the woods, the grass, and corn-fields: these are finely contrasted by the grey rocks and cliffs; and the whole heightened by the yellow streams of light, the purple hues, and misty azure of the mountains.
Sometimes a serene air and clear sky disclose the tops of the highest hills; at others, you see clouds involving their summits, resting on their sides, or descending to their base, and rolling among the valleys, as in a vast furnace.
When the winds are high, they roar among the cliffs and caverns, like peals of thunder; then too the clouds are seen in vast bodies, sweeping along the hills in gloomy greatness, while the lake joins the tumult and tosses like a sea.
But in calm weather the whole scene becomes new; the lake is a perfect mirror; and the landscape in all its beauty, islands, fields, woods, rocks, and mountains, are seen inverted, and floating on its surface.
I will now carry you to the top of a cliff, where, if you dare approach the ridge, a new scene of astonishment presents itself; where this valley, lake, and islands, seem lying at your feet; where the expanse of water appears diminished to a little pool, amidst the vast immeasurable objects that surround it; for here the summits of more distant hills appear above those you had already seen, and rising behind each other in successive ranges, and azure groups of craggy and broken steeps, form an immense and awful picture, which can only be expressed by the image of a tempestuous sea of mountains.
Let me now conduct you down again to the valley, and conclude with once circumstance more, which is, that a walk by still moonlight( at which time the distant waterfalls are heard in all their variety of sound) among these enchanting dales, opens a scene of such delicate beauty, repose, and solemnity, as exceeds all description."
I shall next quote Mr. Gilpin, a writer who could use with equal ability the pen and the pencil. "
By this time we approached Keswick( by the Ambleside road), and from the descent of Castle Hill, at about two miles distance, had an extensive view of the whole country around that celebrated scene of romantic beauty. "
Before us lay a plain of many leagues in circumference, divided into large portions, each of which is floated by a lake; Derwent Water overspreads the nearer, and Bassenthwaite Water the more distant.
Surrounding the whole, rises a vast chain of mountains, and towering over them all, on the eastern side of the Isthmus, stands the mountain of Skiddaw.
We heard too much of this mountain to meet it properly: it has none of those bold projections, and of that shaggy majesty about it, which we expected to have seen in this king of mountains.
But if the mountain disappointed us, the scene over which it presided went beyond our imagination. "
As the boundaries of the lake of Derwent are more mountainous than those of Windermere, they of course afford more romantic scenery.
But though the whole shore is encircled with mountains, they rarely fall abruptly into the water; which is girt almost round with a margin of meadow-- on the western shores especially.
On the eastern the mountains approach nearer the water, and in some parts fall perpendicular into it.
But as we stood viewing the lake from its northern shores, all these marginal parts were lost, and the mountains( though in fact they describe a circle of twenty miles, which is double the circumference of the lake) appeared universally to rise from the water's edge.
Along the western shores, on the right they rise smooth and uniform; and are therefore rather lumpish.
The more removed part of this mountain line is elegant; but in some parts it is disagreeably broken. "
On the eastern side the mountains are both grander and more picturesque.
The line is pleasing, and is filled with that variety of objects, broken ground, rocks, and wood, which, being well combined, take from the heaviness of a mountain, and give it an airy lightness.
The front screen( if we may so call a portion of a circular form) is more formidable than either of the sides: but its line is less elegant than the eastern screen. "
Of all the lakes in these romantic regions, the lake we are now examining seems to be most generally admired.
It was once admirably characterized by an ingenious person( Mr. Avison, late organist at Newcastle), who, on his seeing it, cried out,' Here is beauty indeed-- beauty lying in the lap of horror!'"
The surface of Derwent Water is sometimes violently agitated by what is called a bottom-wind, and does not regain its tranquillity till the confined air has spent its force.
This singular phenomenon varies as to the time of its duration: sometimes the swell continues only for an hour or two; sometimes it will last nearly a whole day, though scarcely a breath of air is felt in the vicinity of the lake.
As lakes in mountainous countries are peculiarly subject to this agitation, it is probably occasioned by the eddying of the wind round the hills.
Spenser, in his description of a lake, has noticed this extraordinary appearance: The waves came rolling, and the billows roar Outrageously, as they engaged were, But not one puff of wind did there appear.
Towards the southern extremity of the lake is occasionally seen what is called a floating island; and it appears chiefly, if not entirely, during the prevalence of the bottom-wind.
This island has its name from its being sometimes visible for a few days or weeks, after which it becomes invisible, and is then covered by water to the depth of ten feet or more.
Various hypotheses have been offered, to account for the alternate rising and sinking of this island.
By some it is attributed to the disengagement of oxygen or hydrogen gas; but the generally received opinion is, that some subterraneous torrent or stream descends from the adjacent mountain, which, having its outlet beneath the islet, forces it from its site, and keeps it afloat.
We are told that artificial islets, with dwelling-huts upon them, float on the lakes of Mexico and China; and, however Philosophy may solve the problem in nature, Poetry, less scrupulous of her authorities, has wrought the artificial image with peculiar felicity to the hands of the voyager: We reached the shore: A floating islet waited for me there, The beautiful work of man.
I set my foot Upon green-growing herbs and flowers, and sate Embowered in odorous shrubs: four long light boats Yoked to the garden, with accordant song, And dip and dash of oar in harmony, Bore me across the lake.
Southey' s Madoc.
Derwentwater abounds with trout, perch, pike, and eel.
The water of this lake is very transparent, perhaps more so than that of any other.
In severe frosts, the surface of this lake becomes one expanded sheet of ice, of sufficient strength to bear the weight of horses and carts.
In this state its four islands are visited, without the labour of the oar, by many pedestrians; and at such time, the surrounding mountains covered with snow, the cliffs adorned with pendant icicles, and the glassy area of the lake reflecting the radiance of the sun, present a spectacle scarcely to be surpassed in grandeur and magnificence.
Moonlight Voyage.
In order to see, with advantage, the various beauties in the vale of Keswick, tourists ought not to neglect to navigate the lake of Derwentwater.
In traversing its bosom, the surrounding scenery will appear in a new style of beauty.
A voyage by moonlight is recommended by some writers as producing an interesting scene.
An expedition of this kind should be undertaken when the moon is at full, or a little before that time, and in a still evening, that the ear may be amused with the different notes of the distant waterfalls, while every object which delighted the eye in the day appears in new and softer colours, in varied beauty, and more solemn grandeur.
The reader is indebted to the author of the History of Cumberland for the following pleasing description of a voyage by moonlight:-- " The romantic scenes upon the lake induced us to take boat at night, under the favour of the moon, which was near at full.
We began our voyage soon after the moon was risen, and had illumined the top of Skiddaw, but, from the intercepting mountains, had not( within the ascent of an hour) reached the lake; we were surrounded with a solemn gloom; the stillness of the evening rendered the voice of the waterfalls tremendous, as they, in all their variety of sounds, were re-echoed from every cliff.
The summits of the rocks, when they began to receive the rising rays, appeared as if crowned with turrets of silver, from which the stars departed for their nightly round.
As the gloom below grew deeper, objects around us seemed to rise to view, as surging on the first morning from chaos.
The water was a plain, studded over with gems reflected from the starry firmament; the groves which hung upon the feet of the mountains were wrapt in darkness, and all below was one grave and majestic circle of Skiddaw, -- Till the moon, Rising in cloudy majesty, at length A parent queen, unveiled her peerless light, And over the dark her silver mantle threw.
Milton. "
When the long protracted shades the mountains cast on the bosom of the lake, shewed the vastness of those masses from whence they proceeded; and still, as the moon arose higher in the horizon, the distant objects began to be more illumined, and the whole presented us with a noble moon-light piece, delicately touched by the hand of nature, and far surpassing those humble scenes which we had often viewed in the works of the Flemish painters. "
Mists began to arise on the lake, and by reason of the air which bore them aloft, being confined and eddying within this deep circle, they were whirled around, and carried upwards like a column, which, as soon as it approached the rays of the moon, had a most wonderful appearance, and resembled a pillar of light. "
The moon's wild beams now glistened on the waters, and touched the groves, the cliffs, and the islands, with a meekness of colouring which added to the solemnity of the night, and these noble and romantic objects struck us with reverence, and inspired the mind with pious sentiments and ejaculations.
It was observable, that by day, we were incessantly communicating our raptures and surprise on each new wonder that opened to our view;-- we now enjoyed them in silence. "
Every bay and promontory assumed an appearance different from what it had by daylight; the little dells which wind round the feet of the mountains, as they were shadowed by interposing objects, or silvered by the moon, afforded most enchanting scenes, where we could have wandered long with delight. "
Where the lake narrows, and runs up in a creek near Borrowdale, the rocks looked tremendous, almost shutting us from the face of heaven; the cliffs were struck with scanty gleams of light, which gained their passage through the interstices of the hills or chasms in the rocks, and served only to discover their horrible overhanging fronts, their mighty caverns, where the water, struck by our oars, made a hollow sound; their deformed and frowning brows, the hanging shrubs with which they were bearded, their sprinkling waterfalls that trilled from shelf to shelf, the whole half seen and half concealed, leaving imagination at large to magnify the images of their grandeur and stupendous magnificence.
The opening of the vale of Newlands was particularly beautiful."
Hutchinson's History of Cumberland.
The effect of moonlight on the lake is thus beautifully described by Mr. Southey: The moon arose; she shone upon the lake, Which lay one smooth expanse of silver light; She shone upon the hills and rocks, and cast Upon their hollows and their hidden glens A blacker depth of shade.
Madoc, vol.
ii.
p. 199. "
Skiddaw."
Skiddaw constitutes such a distinguished part of the Alpine scenery, which environs the lake and vale of Keswick, that some description of it cannot be thought superfluous.
What was the great Parnassus' self to Thee, Mount Skiddaw?
In his natural sovereignty, Our British hill is fairer far!
he shrouds His double-fronted head in higher clouds, And pours forth streams more sweet than Castaly.
Wordsworth.
It rises 2560 feet perpendicular from the level of the lake of Bassenthwaite, and 3530 feet from the plane of the sea at Whitehaven.
It extends into several parishes and townships; and that part which is in the parish of Crosthwaite has been inclosed by virtue of an act of parliament passed in 1810.
An excursion to the top of Skiddaw is generally made by the visitors of Derwent Water.
From Keswick to the base of Skiddaw is about one mile; and from this a winding road leads to its summit, of about five miles more, which, though some parts of the ascent are steep, may, by proceeding in a zigzag direction, be easily traversed on horseback by those to whom an ascent on foot would prove a laborious undertaking.
The road leads by Monk's Hall, leaving Ormathwaite on the left, and afterwards proceeds in a serpentine form around the breast of Latrigg, a beautiful mountain pasture that overlooks the lake of Derwent and the sweet pastoral vale, in which that fine expanse of water is embosomed.
A guide is indispensably necessary in ascending Skiddaw on account of the sudden mists which frequently arise, and which would otherwise endanger the personal safety of the tourist.
The top of this mountain is covered with shivers of blue slate, which prevent vegetation, and give to this part a cheerless aspect.
The view from the summit of Skiddaw is grand and extensive, and has been thus described by a female traveller, whose pages will be always read with pleasure:" We stood on a pinnacle, commanding the whole dome of the sky.
The prospects below, each of which had been before considered separately as a great scene, were now miniature parts of the immense landscape.
To the north lay, like a map, the vast tract of low country, which extends between Bassenthwaite and the Irish Channel, marked with the silver circles of the River Derwent, in its progress from the lake.
Whitehaven and its white coast were distinctly seen and Cockermouth seemed almost under the eye.
A long blackish line, more to the west, resembling a faintly formed cloud, was said by the guide to be the Isle of Man, who, however, had the honesty to confess, that the mountains of Down in Ireland, which have been sometimes thought visible, had never been seen by him in the clearest weather. "
Bounding the low country to the north, the wide Solway Frith, with its indented shores, looked like a gray horizon, and the double range of Scottish mountains, seen dimly through mist beyond, like lines of dark clouds above it.
The Solway appeared surprisingly near us, though at fifty miles distance, and the guide said, that, on a bright day, its shipping could be plainly discerned.
Nearly in the north, the heights seemed to soften into plains, for no object was there visible through the obscurity that had begun to draw over the furthest distance; but, towards the east, they appeared to swell again, and what we were told were the Cheviot Hills dawned feebly beyond Northumberland.
We now spanned the narrowest part of England, looking from the Irish channel, on one side, to the German ocean, on the other, which latter was, however, so far off as to be discernible only like a mist. "
Nearer than the county of Durham, stretched the ridge of Cross Fell, and an indistinct multitude of the Westmorland and Yorkshire highlands, whose lines appeared behind Saddleback, now evidently pre-eminent over Skiddaw, so much so as to exclude many a height beyond it.
Passing this mountain in our course to the south, we saw, immediately below the fells round Derwent Water, the lake itself remaining still concealed in their deep rocky bosom.
Southward and westward was a' turbulent chaos of dark mountains.'
All individual dignity was now lost in the immensity of the whole, and every variety of character was overpowered by that of astonishing and gloomy grandeur. "
Over the fells of Borrowdale, and far to the south, the northern end of Windermere appeared, like a wreath of gray smoke that spreads along the mountain's side.
More southward still, and beyond all the fells of the lakes, Lancaster sands extended to the faintly seen waters of the sea.
Then to the west, Duddon Sands gleamed in a long line among the fells of High Furness.
Immediately under the eye, lay Bassenthwaite, surrounded by many ranges of mountains, invisible from below.
We overlooked all these dark mountains, and saw green cultivated vales over the tops of lofty rocks, and other mountains over these vales in many varied forms, whilst innumerable narrow glens were traced in all their windings, and seen united behind the hills with others that also sloped upwards from the lake. "
The air on this summit was boisterous, intensely cold, and difficult to be inspired, though the day was, below, warm and serene.
It was dreadful to look down from nearly the brink of the point on which we stood, upon the lake of Bassenthwaite, and over a sharp and separated ridge of rocks, that from below appeared of tremendous height, but now seemed not to reach half way up Skiddaw; it was almost as if The precipitation might down stretch Below the beam of sight."
Mrs. Radcliffe's Observations during a Tour to the Lakes.
Lowdore Waterfall.
Pursuing the road from Keswick on the eastern shore of Derwent Water, you arrive at Barrow House, a neat mansion, the seat of Joseph Pocklington, esq.
Above Barrow House, you ascend through a steep winding alpine path to four different stations, whence the waterfall, called Barrow Cascade, may be advantageously seen.
Proceeding along the eastern margin of the lake, you arrive at the waterfall of Lowdore, which is three miles distant from Keswick, and presents a singularly harmonious assemblage of the sublime and beautiful.
It is the Niagara of Derwent Water, and is situated near the head of the lake.
The stupendous crags, between which the torrent precipitates itself, broken into the boldest forms, are covered with birch, ash, and other trees, hanging in the most fantastic shapes from the fissures of the rock.
The character of this deservedly celebrated cataract varies with the season.
In dry weather the fall is inconsiderable, and its grandeur consequently much diminished; but when charged with the thousand streams, which a torrent of rain pours from the mountains, the bubbling cascade becomes a stupendous cataract, which, rushing down an enormous pile of protruding rocks, rolls along with uninterrupted volume and impetuous velocity, and shakes the hills with its rebound.
At such time the scene is truly magnificent.
The tremendous roar of the rushing waters, which, it is said, can in a serene evening be distinctly heard at the distance of ten or twelve miles, is perfectly in unison with its rocky accompaniments.
The descent of this waterfall is not less than one hundred and fifty feet; and after a heavy rain, in a full torrent, it exhibits a scene of grandeur, of which no verbal description can give an adequate idea.
Smooth to the shelving brink, a copious flood Rolls fair and placid; where, collected all, In one impetuous torrent, down the steep It thundering shoots, and shakes the country round.
At first, an azure sheet, it rushes broad; Then whitening by degrees as prone it falls, And from the loud resounding rocks below Dashed in a cloud of foam, it sends aloft A hoary mist, and forms a ceaseless shower.
Nor can the tortured wave here find repose: But, raging still amid the shaggy rocks, Now flashes over the scattered fragments, now Aslant the hollowed channel rapid darts; And falling fast from gradual slope to slope, With wild infracted course, and lessened roar, It gains a safer bed, and steals, at last, Along the mazes of the quiet vale.
Thomson. "
By this time," says Mr. Gilpin," we had reached the head of the lake; and could now distinguish the full sound of the fall of Lowdore, which had before reached our ears, as the wind suffered, indistinctly, in broken notes.
This waterfall is a noble object both in itself and as an ornament of the lake.
It appears more as an object connected with the lake, as we approached by water.
By land, we see it over a promontory of low ground, which, in some degree, hides its grandeur.
At the distance of a mile, it begins to appear with dignity.
But of whatever advantage the fall of Lowdore may be as a piece of distant scenery, its effect is very noble, when examined on the spot.
As a single object it wants no accompaniments of offskip, which would rather injure than assist it. "
The stream falls through a chasm, between two towering perpendicular rocks.
The intermediate parts, broken into large fragments, form the rough bed of the cascade.
Some of these fragments, stretching out in shelves, hold a depth of soil sufficient for large trees.
Among these broken rocks the stream finds its way, through a fall at least of an hundred feet; and in heavy rains, the water is every way suited to the grandeur of the scene.
Rocks and water in opposition can hardly produce a more animated strife.
The ground at the bottom is also very much broken, and overgrown with trees and thickets; amongst which the water is swallowed up into an abyss; and at length finds its way through deep channels into the lake.
We dismounted, and got as near as we could; but were not able to approach so near as to look into the woody chasm which receives the fall. "
Though we had seen," observes Mr. Gilpin in another place," the fall of Lowdore from the bottom, we had a curiosity to see how it appeared from the top: and dismounting, we contrived, by winding round the thickets, and clinging to the projections of the rocks, to get a dangerous peep down the abyss.
There was nothing picturesque in the view, but something immensely grand.
We stood now above those two cheeks of the chasm, through which the water forced its way; and which in the morning, when seen from the bottom, appeared towering to a great height, and were the most interesting parts of the view.
But, amidst the greatness of the objects, which now surrounded them, they were totally lost, appearing less than warts to those vast limbs of nature, to which they adhered."
Journey To The Wad Mines.
An excursion from Keswick to the Wad Mines in Borrowdale exhibits a variety of romantic views, and should not, therefore, be neglected by the tourist.
We have already conducted the reader to the celebrated waterfall at Lowdore; but it may not be improper to inform him, that the road from Keswick to the Wad Mines is by Castlet, Wallow Crag, Barrow House, Lowdore Inn, Grange, Bowdar Stone, Rosthwaite, and Seathwaite.
Castlet, which is scarcely half a mile from Keswick, is a lofty crag, fringed with trees, and a station for a general view of the lake of Derwent.
Wallow Crag is a steep and rocky cliff impending over the road, and exhibiting a few trees hanging from its fissures.
The cavity upon its summit is called Lady's Rake, from a tradition that, through this chasm, Lady Derwentwater effected her escape when the unfortunate earl was arrested for high treason.
Barrow House has been already noticed as the romantic residence of Joseph Pocklington, Esq.
A little above the house is a cascade of two falls; the higher of which is fifty - four perpendicular feet, and the lower fifty - two feet.
Lowdore Inn is very pleasantly situated on the margin of Derwent Water, about three miles from the town of Keswick, and near to the celebrated cataract called Lowdore Waterfall.
At this inn is kept a small cannon, for the purpose of gratifying those who are pleased with echoes.
When a cannon is discharged at this place, from a meadow sloping to the water's edge, it is said that nine distant echoes may be enumerated.
Sublime In awful majesty the thunder rolls; Onward it rolls, and loud and louder roars In peals successive, heard afar afar, Re Echoed oft by rocks and caverns deep From all the neighbouring hills, till circling round, Still gaining force, again it bursts, a peal That stuns the ear.
Rocks dashed on rocks are heard Rattling around.
Address to Loch Lomond.
This discharge will cost four shillings.
There is, indeed, a smaller cannon, which was formerly discharged for two shillings and sixpence; but, as Don Manuel Espriella has sagaciously remarked," when one buys an echo, who would be content, for the sake of saving eighteen pence, to put up with the second best, instead of ordering at once the super-extra-double-superfine?"
As these echoes are expensive, it is necessary to see that the full charge of gunpowder is put in, and properly rammed down; otherwise, much of the sublime effect, produced by the rolling thunder, will be lost.
Grange is a small romantic village, situated on the west side of the River Derwent, about a mile above its entrance into the lake, in one of the finest and most picturesque scenes to be found in this country.
Borrowdale, contracted in its width, now assumes the appearance of a pass between mountains.
Bowdar Stone, about a mile from the village of Grange, is a gigantic mass of rock, which, from the similarity of its veins to those of the adjoining precipice, appears to have been detached from the latter by lightning, or by some violent convulsion of nature.
It rests on some fragments of rock, and lies almost hollow, the road winding round its eastern side.
Mr. Gilpin observes, that" it lies in a diagonal position, overshadowing a space sufficient to shelter a troop of horse."
The shape of this stone bears some resemblance to a large ship upon its keel.
Its solidity has been estimated at 23090 feet, and its weight at 1771 tons.
Mr. Pocklington, whose erections on Vicar's Islands, in Derwent Water, have called forth so many and such severe censures from the admirers of nature, has also applied his improvements to this spot, by building a little mock hermitage or chapel, and setting up a Druidical stone.
He has also" erected a little cottage for an old woman to live in, who is to shew the rock, for fear travellers should pass under it without seeing it, and cleared away all the fragments round it: and, as it rests upon a narrow base, like a ship upon its keel, he has dug a hole underneath, through which the curious may gratify themselves, by shaking hands with the old woman."
To add to these deformities, a crazy ladder has been erected against the Bowdar stone, to enable persons to see imperfectly from its top what they can behold to much better advantage from the summit of Castle Crag, which rears its lofty head opposite to the stone.
Castle Crag is a detached mountain, half covered with brush-wood, and has obtained its name from a fortress supposed to be of Roman origin, which once frowned upon its summit, and guarded the tremendous pass of Borrowdale.
After this fortress had been relinquished by the Romans, it was occupied by the Saxons, and was subsequently given, with all the lands about Borrowdale, by one of the lords of Derwentwater, to the monks of Furness.
By these religious it was for many years continued in its military capacity, to defend their valuable possessions in the vale of Borrowdale, against the predatory incursions of the Scots, who, in those days, frequently made irruptions into the south.
The slate works which have been wrought in this mountain have, at length, obliterated every vestige of the ancient fortress.
The views are grand and extensive from the summit of Castle Crag, which may be ascended by the narrow paths in the side of the hill for carrying down the slate.
On one side are seen the lake and fertile vale of Keswick, with their accompaniments of islands, rocks, villages, seats, farm-houses, and cottages; beyond which, the majestic Skiddaw appears, overlooking the more rugged neighbouring mountains, in the background.
On the opposite side is seen the pass of Borrowdale, where immense rocky mountains are huddled together in the most formidable arrangement.
Between Bowdar Stone and Castle Crag flows the Derwent, singularly clear, over a rocky channel.
The whole of this scenery is" as beautiful as eyes can behold, or imagination conceive."
Besides their tithe corn, the holy fathers amassed here the valuable minerals of the country, among which salt, produced from a spring in the valley, was no inconsiderable article.
Gilpin.
From hence to the village of Rosthwaite is a tolerably good road, having Castle Crag on the right, and Bowdar Crag on the left, both of them half wooded to their summits.
Bowdar Crag is of very singular conformation, consisting of vast masses of rock, disposed partly in strata, and partly in a columnar order.
In various places on the side of the road are huge craggy fragments, which have been severed from the impending mountains by some concussion of nature: some are lying on the level road; others are apparently suspended from the sides of the mountains, and cause the traveller to feel some apprehension for his personal safety.
Some of these are covered with moss, while the crevices of others afford a scanty soil to the hardy trees which grow out of their sides.
After leaving Castle Crag, the chasm of Borrowdale soon becomes sufficiently wide to admit a strip of cultivated ground; and many fronts of the rocky hills are softened with hanging woods.
Rosthwaite, about a mile from Bowdar Stone, is a romantic village, shadowed by impending mountains, and in some degree excluded from all intercourse with the surrounding country, particularly during the months of winter.
At this place the road divides, one branch leading to the wad mines and Ravenglass, the other, on the left, to Hawks Head.
Seathwaite is a small hamlet, so deeply intrenched in mountains that the sun never visits it during the depths of winter, and even in summer sheds his rays on it with reluctance.
From an opening on the left is a view of Eagle Crag, a terrific rock, once celebrated as the chief habitation of eagles, whence its name is derived.
Seathwaite stands at the foot of the mountain which contains the wad mines, nearly ten miles distant from Keswick.
The Wad Mines.
These mines are on the eastern side of Seataller Fell, a steep and lofty mountain, decorated with hazels, till you approach its summit, which is rocky, barren, and desolate.
The exact time when these mines were discovered has not been ascertained.
Certain, however, it is, that they have been occasionally worked since the reign of Queen Elizabeth.
They are private property, and are opened only once in seven years.
They are secured by a temporary mason-work, and by a house over each entrance, in which reside the stewards and workmen during the time they continue open.
Nor is this precaution unnecessary.
About seventy years ago, a person who possessed a part of the mountain contiguous to the mines, determined to obtain a share of this rich mineral.
Here, with great labour, he sank a shaft, which he carried diagonally till he entered the mines; and, with secret joy, he continued his depredations for some time undiscovered.
At length his fraud was detected; and he was tried at Carlisle.
The peculiarity of his case had no precedent.
He saved his life; but an act of parliament was passed in 1752 to secure this valuable property; by which the stealer and receiver are both subjected to the same punishment as for felony.
Wad, or, as it is improperly called, blacklead, is not found in regular veins, but in lumps and irregular masses, several of which weigh four or five pounds.
Some of these pieces are hard and gritty, and of little value; others are soft and of a fine texture, and worth four guineas a pound.
It is described as lying in the mine in the form of a tree, having a body or root, from which proceed veins or branches in all directions; the body is the finest wad, and the branches are of an inferior quality.
It is, however, sometimes found in sops or floats, in a body without branches.
A blue rock lies on each side of the mineral, and sometimes a wet sludge, as the miners term it, between the rock and the wad.
Such is the richness of the mines, that, in the space of half an hour, a single workman can obtain as much of the mineral as will sell for one thousand pounds.
When the mines are opened, a sufficient quantity is procured to answer the demand.
The wad of the best quality is packed in barrels, and conveyed under a strong guard to Kendal, whence it is sent to London by waggons, the proprietors of which give a bond for its safe delivery.
The inferior sort is conveyed by land to Ulverstone, whence it is shipped for the metropolis.
Of late years apprehensions have been entertained that the supply of this useful article would fail; but larger quantities have been since procured, and the mines have proved more productive.
Hutchinson's History of Cumberland.
Dr. Merret, and some others, have supposed that these are the only mines of wad in the world; but this is not the case.
A mineral of a similar nature, though of an inferior quality, and obtained only in small quantities, has been discovered in Scotland, Spain, Germany, and the East Indies.
Some have supposed, though improperly, that this mineral is the molybdena or galena of Pliny; others, that it is the pingitis or melanteria of Dioscorides: but it does not in reality appear to have been known to the ancients.
Camden was of opinion, that it is a stony sort of black ochre burnt to blackness in the earth.
Mr. Robinson, in his Natural History of Cumberland, calls it a black, pinguid, shining earth, impregnated with lead and antimony.
This mineral had been introduced into medicine, and has been considered as a remedy, or, at least, a lenitive in the cholic and gravel.
Besides its medicinal properties, it is applied in cleansing and giving lustre to iron, and in varnishing crucibles and other vessels which are exposed to fierce fires.
But the principal consumption of this mineral consists in what are called black-lead pencils, which have acquired so much reputation abroad, under the title of crayons d' Angleterre.
It is bought by the pencil-makers in London, who attend a sale of it in Essex Street, on the first Monday in every month.
Wastwater.
The vale of Borrowdale becomes now more contracted, and the way is progressively more rugged.
You now mount towards the head of Borrowdale, a continued ascent through narrow winding paths between rocks and precipices, down which pours a roaring torrent, that, after flowing for some miles, passes through the village of Grange, and becomes the main feeder of the lake of Derwent.
Having reached the head of Borrowdale, you pass Stockley Bridge, a rude alpine structure, consisting of a single arch of stone.
Hence you proceed up the northern side of the mountain Sparkling towards Sty Head, a steep and precipitous crag, from which the eye looks down with terror, and from the summit of which is a grand view of Skiddaw and Saddleback.
This summit forms a rocky plain, not quite half a mile in extent, and environed( except a narrow passage at each extremity) by a circle of steep slaty crags; and in its centre is Sty Head tarn, a small but deep lake, about three quarters of a mile in circumference, and abounding with the finest trout.
The scenery around this place is calculated to inspire emotions of the most awful kind; but on reaching the brow, on the opposite side of Sty Head, a most delightful view opens to the eye: below, the River Wastdale is seen falling from the adjacent mountains; at the bottom, are the fertile dale and village of Wastdale, with the lake of Wastwater beyond; and on either side rise mountains of stupendous height, particularly Sea Fell, which is said to be the loftiest mountain in England, and the height of which, according to the trigonometrical survey, is 3165 feet above the level of the sea.
But, however charming and extensive the scenery unquestionably is, the idea of its beauty is almost immediately lost in the overpowering sensation of danger, which seizes the mind when contemplating the path to be descended.
Above appear tremendous mountains, whose bases seem almost to meet; and below is a precipice, almost interminable to the eye, along which the narrow and nearly perpendicular path wound, without any fence to prevent the traveller from falling down to certain death, if he should by any accident miss his footing.
As the road approaches towards the foot of the mountain, it becomes wider and less perpendicular; and after a descent of at least one mile you reach the vale.
From the difficulty of access, except on the side of Egremont, Wastdale village and lake are rarely visited.
Once gained, however, these interesting objects will amply compensate the traveller or tourist for his previous labour.
Here every thing is rural, and appears in the true style of pastoral simplicity.
The Screes, a very high ridge of mountains, extends along the southern shore of the lake; and the loose rocks on its sides are in an almost constant motion, falling in shivers into the water.
The village is divided into two parts, Wastdale Head, or Upper Wastdale, consisting of six or seven dwellings; and Nether, or Lower Wastdale, where is a public house.
Hospitality is the characteristic of the inhabitants of this secluded valley.
The lake of Wastwater is three miles in length, and, in the widest part, about three quarters of a mile in breadth.
The scenery of this lake has been portrayed with equal beauty and accuracy by a modern poet: There is a lake, hid far among the hills, That raves around the throne of Solitude, Not fed by gentle streams, or playful rills, But headlong cataract or rushing flood.
There gleam no lovely hues of hanging wood,-- No spot of sunshine lights her sullen side,-- For horror shaped the wild in wrathful mood, And over the tempest heaved the mountain's pride.
Wilson's Isle of Palms.
Watenlath.
As tourists in general seldom visit Wastwater, on account of the difficult road which leads to it, you may( if you think proper), on your return to Rosthwaite from the Wad Mines, travel over an alpine pass to the vale of Watenlath, one of the most romantic situations in these remote regions.
A late writer thus describes this vale:" Two of our melancholy bards, Cowley and Cowper, breathed out their wishes for an abode in some deep solitude, where their feelings might no longer be harassed by the noise, the follies, and the crimes of the world.
Under this temper of mind, they could not have selected a more suitable spot than the vale of Watenlath.
Environed on all sides by mountains, no ruder sounds would have met their ears, if we except the roaring of winds and cataracts, than the bleating of sheep and the melody of the shepherd's lute.
They might have lived like the Laplanders, in gloomy twilight during the winter months."
" Watenlath," says Mr. Gilpin," is that tract of mountainous country,( itself surrounded by mountains still higher) which, coming boldly forward, breaks down abruptly from the south upon the vale of Keswick.
The stream which forms the fall of Lowdore adorns first the scenes of Watenlath. "'
Which way to Watenlath?"
said one of our company to a peasant as we left the vale of Borrowdale. '
That way,' said he, pointing up a lofty mountain steeper than the tiling of a house.
The question we asked we found was a very improper one.
We should have asked in what direction we were to seek it?
For way there was none, except here and there a blind path, which being itself often bewildered, of course served only to bewilder us.
The inhabitants pay little attention to path; they steer along these wilds by land-marks, which to us were unknown. "
At length, however, after a painful perpendicular march of near two miles, and many a breathing pause, which our horses required, we gained the top.
Here we expected at least to be rewarded by an amusing prospect over the neighbouring country.
But in this too we were disappointed.
We found ourselves in the midst of a bog, with still higher grounds around us; so that, after all our toil, we had a view only of a vile circumscribed waste. "
It was our business now to get out of this unpleasant scene as soon as we could, which was a matter of no great difficulty.
An easy and short descent on the other side of the mountain brought us quickly to Watenlath.
Here our labours were amply rewarded.
We fell into a piece of scenery, which, for beauty and grandeur, was equal, if not superior, to any thing we had yet seen. "
The first object we found was a small lake, about two miles in circumference, through which flows the Lowdore, and after a course of three miles further, forms the noble cascade at the head of Derwent Water."
On the right, after descending a little from the summit, appears the sparkling river, a pure crystalline stream, winding with serpentine coils in its progress towards the lake of Watenlath.
On the left the lake contracting itself into a river, closed on each side by steep towering rocks, and bending to the fall which may be observed on entering into Borrowdale, gives life and spirit to the whole.
On every side the scene is terminated by the boundary, near or remote, of rugged and broken steeps, presenting themselves in chaotic confusion to the awe-struck spectator.
The lake of Watenlath, with rich verdure on its sides, and the wild irregular magnificence of the surrounding mountains, exhibit the strong contrast of barrenness and vegetation; and the condensation of the whole, which brings it nearly within the compass of one view, is calculated to excite in the mind admiration of the wonderful works of God.
From Watenlath return to Keswick by Ashness, a journey of five miles, which can be performed only on horseback or on foot, on account of the ruggedness and narrowness of the road.
Bassenthwaite Lake.
Bassenthwaite Lake, or, as it is sometimes called, Broad Water, is nearly four miles north of Derwent Water, and is formed by the River Derwent, which flows in a serpentine form through a fine extensive vale.
This lake is said to be four miles and a half in length; at its northern extremity it is nearly a mile in breadth; but, lower down, it decreases to little more than a quarter of a mile.
On the east side is the beautiful and extensive vale of Bassenthwaite, deeply indented with three bays, behind which the mighty Skiddaw rears its lofty head.
Opposite, on the west, is a range of high mountains, which fall abruptly to the water's edge, leaving only two or three small spots, on which cultivation can prevail.
These declivities are called Withop Brows, and are partly rocky, and partly covered with thick woods, which consist chiefly of young oaks growing out of old stems.
To view the beauties of this lake, proceed along the eastern margin to Armathwaite.
A road to the left leads to Bradness, a round verdant hill, which projects considerably into the water, and with the assistance of two other promontories, forms a spacious bay, having Bowness on the south and Scarness on the north.
From the summit of this hill, you have a good general view of the lake, and of the three beautiful bays which indent its eastern shore, forming a fine contrast with the lofty hills and hanging woods on the opposite side.
After regaining the road, you recede rather farther from the water, and proceed towards Ousebridge, by way of Bassenthwaite Hall.
On an elevated part of this road, to the north of the village, is another fine view of the lake, the north side of Skiddaw, the opposite shore, and the vales of Embleton and Isel.
Farther on you reach Armathwaite, a small but finely situated seat, at the head of a gentle slope, and commanding through a grove of trees a grand view of the lake.
Here you see the lowest bay in all its beauty: the lake of Bassenthwaite seems to retire behind the promontory of Scarness; and the hanging woods of Withop, on the opposite side, add considerably to the scene.
A pleasant road leads to Ousebridge, where is a good inn fronting the lake, and commanding some variegated prospects.
Here the lake, without any previous contraction, or the least appearance of an outlet, pours forth its waters beneath a stone bridge of three arches; and resuming once more the name of a river, the Derwent, after a winding course through several verdant valleys, at length falls into the sea at Workington.
This is a handsome modern structure, erected by Sir Frederick Fletcher Vane, Bart.
at a short distance from the site of the old bridge, which was carried away by the swelling of the Derwent.
For the sake of variety, so necessary in excursions of this nature, we shall return to Keswick along the western shores, by a road passable on horseback.
This is a delightful ride, especially in the evening, and whilst the water is still gilded by the radiance of the sun.
At such a time, when the lake is one vast expanse of crystal mirror, the mountain shadows are softened into a mild blue tint, which sweeps over half the surface, and the other half receives the fair impression of every radiant form that glows around.
This scenery recalls to mind the following exquisite delineation of objects reflected in the water: In a deep pool, by happy chance we saw A two - fold image; on a grassy bank A snow-white ram, and, in the crystal flood Another and the same!
Most beautiful, On the green turf, with his imperial front, Shaggy and bold, and wreathed horns superb, The breathing creature stood; as beautiful, Beneath him, shewed his shadowy counterpart.
Each had his glowing mountains, each his sky, And each seemed centre of his own fair world.
Wordsworth's Excursions.
In some places the road is elevated considerably above the water, and leads on the side of the mountain; in some parts it descends to the level of the lake, and in others, it is immersed in the woods, and affords only occasional glimpses of the surrounding scenery.
At Beck Withop, the view of the lake is full and pleasing.
The water beautifully expands to the eye, having its outlet concealed by Castle How, a circular peninsula crowned with wood, on which appear the vestiges of a fortress.
On this side, the shore is lined with a range of rocks, half concealed in low wood, over which rise Withop Brows.
The opposite shore is indented with beautiful bays, formed by the promontories of Scarness, Bowness, and Bradness.
From hence is seen, in a pleasing point of view, a part of the vale of Bassenthwaite, interspersed with its church and two or three white houses.
Ullock, a gloomy mountain, covered with heath, forms the back ground of this picture; and Skiddaw appears in all its pre-eminence, towering above the neighbouring hills in majestic grandeur, and lifts its summit to the skies.
On all sides the scenery is various, and the whole of it beautifully picturesque.
In your progress you obtain a distant view of the town of Keswick, seated amidst a stupendous amphitheatre of mountains.
As you approach Keswick, Skiddaw appears to great advantage; Crosthwaite church and vicarage are successively seen; and between these and the town, on the left, is the Villa Lucretilis of the poet laureat, who has so beautifully apostrophised it in his" Pilgrimage to Waterloo."
The mansion of the poet stands upon an eminence, at whose base flows the River Greta, whence its name, Greta Bridge.
On the verdant tops of some of the hills in the neighbourhood of this lake may be discovered traces of the plough, for which it is difficult to assign a satisfactory reason.
Tradition says, that the Pope, in the reign of King John, cursed all the lower grounds, which obliged the inhabitants to cultivate the hills:" but," observes Mr. Pennant," I rather believe that John himself drove them to this cruel necessity; for, out of resentment of their declining to follow his standards to the borders of Scotland, he cut down their hedges, levelled their ditches, and gave all the cultivated tracts of the north to the beasts of the chase on his return from his expedition."
Upon a hill, near Armathwaite, is a circular British intrenchment, and at the foot of Caer Mote, a verdant mountain, upon the summit of which formerly stood a beacon, are the vestiges of two square intrenchments; one of which is inclosed with a double fosse, extending from east to west 121 paces, and from south to north 100 paces; the other is inclosed with a fosse and rampart of 60 feet by 70.
It is evident that these camps are Roman; and the name given to the hill by the Britons, proves their opinion of them.
It is not improbable, from their commanding situation, that these camps are the Arbeia, where the Bercarii Tigrinenses were stationed.
Camden, indeed, places the Arbeia of the Romans are Ireby; but the situation of that town prevents us from adopting his opinion.
In a place like it, situated in a deep glen, and guarded on all sides by lofty mountains, the necessity of a garrison is not very apparent; and we also know that the Romans never made choice of such a site for a camp or garrison.
The camp on Caer Mote is in full view of Blatumbulgii( Bowness) and Olenacum( Old Carlisle); and commanding the whole extent of the Solway Frith, would receive the first notice from any frontier station, of the place where the Caledonians would attempt to cross the Frith, or had actually entered the province.
The vale of Bassenthwaite extends from the foot of Skiddaw to Ousebridge; it is variegated with many beautiful objects both of art and nature, and, in general, is a rich and fertile tract of land.
The lake, which adds so much to its beauty, is nearly as transparent as that of Derwent, and abounds with a great variety of fish and water-fowl.
Buttermere.
An excursion from Keswick to Buttermere, a distance of eight miles, ought not to be neglected by those who visit the lakes, and who wish to view nature under different aspects.
The road to Buttermere is through Portinseale, Swinside, and the vales of Newlands and Keskadale.
A ride up the vale of Newlands presents some of the finest pastoral scenes that can be imagined.
In the course of this ride the mountains are grand and sublime, and void of projecting precipice or over-hanging cliff.
They vary very materially both in form and colour.
Here are large hollow craters scooped in their bosoms, which overflow with the purest water, that foams down their craggy brows; whilst woods adorn their base, and other lakes, clear as the Derwent, lie at their feet.
The other parts of these scenes are verdant hills, spotted with wood and rock; and the valleys appear in the richest style of pastoral beauty.
Mr. Gilpin, with his usual felicity, has described the scenery of this district. "
From Keswick," he says," we mounted the hills on the northwest of the lake; and, on the other side, fell into the valley of Newlands, which we traversed from end to end.
It was a lovely scene, totally different from the rude valleys we had yet met with.
The mountains in general on this side of the lake wear a smoother form than those either on the east or on the south.
Of this smoothness of feature in the higher grounds the lower participate.
The mountain valleys we had hitherto seen were rocky, wild, and desolate; but here the idea of terror was excluded.
The valley of Newlands was even adorned with the beauties of luxuriant nature.
We travelled through groves, which were sometimes open and sometimes close, with a sparkling stream, the common attendant of these valleys, accompanying us through the whole scene. "
Having been amused with this delightful scenery, through the space of three miles, we entered another valley, or rather a mountain recess, called the valley of Keskadale.
I call it a recess, because it is soon terminated by a mountain running athwart, which denies any further passage.
Instead, therefore, of entering Keskadale, we were obliged to climb the hill which forms one of its sides; and from the summit we had a view not only of Keskadale, but of many other mountain-recesses, all of which participate more or less of the smoothness of the high grounds in the neighbourhood.
Some of them were scooped and hollowed into beautiful forms, in which wood only was wanting. "
The valley of Keskadale had nothing to recommend it but novelty; a dead mountain-recess, environed on every side except the entrance by smooth sloping hills, which are adorned neither with wood, nor rock, nor broken ground, but sweep down from side to side with the greatest regularity.
At the head of this recess is a grand cascade. "
The mountain over which we pass is called the Hawse, or stoppage, the valley being closed, and no other way left.
This hawse, though not so steep as the mountain which led us to Watenlath, was of much longer continuance, and in some parts carried us very near the edges of the precipices. "
As we began to descend we breathed a pure air, and got a sight of the landscape before us.
It was a scene unlike what we had just passed.
Three broad mountains sloping into each other, formed a tripartite valley, centring in one point.
The surface of each mountain was smooth to its summit; through two of the divisions of the valley ran different streams, each of them as unfringed and simple as the mountain they severed.
These streams, uniting in the centre, formed a third.
These smooth-coated mountains are great sources of plenty; they are the nurseries of sheep, which are bred here and fatted in the valleys. "
After winding about two miles along the edge of one of these smooth mountains, we dropped at once into a beautiful vale called the Vale Of Buttermere, the bosom of which is adorned by a lake of the same name.
This lake is small; about a mile and a half in length, and a quarter of a mile in breadth; of an oblong form, sweeping at one end around a woody promontory.
The scenery about it is grand and beautiful.
On the western side a long range of mountainous declivity stretches from end to end, falling every where precipitately into the water; at least it had that appearance to the eye, though on the spot probably a margin of meadow might extend from the bottom of the mountain.
The eastern side of the lake is woody, and contrasts happily with the western.
Near the bottom of this vale is the loftiest cascade we had seen.
It hardly, I think, falls through a less descent than three or four hundred yards, appearing at a distance like a white riband bisecting the mountain.
The people of the country, alluding to its foam, call it Sour Milk-force. "
The vale of Buttermere is rather confined in that part which the lake occupies.
Below, it extends a considerable way.
Gatesgarth Dale opens at the head of the lake.
Here we found two valleys formed by a mountain on each side, and one in the middle.
The right-hand valley was closed by a hawse: the left leads to the scenes we sought after.
The transition here is abrupt.
We had been travelling all the morning among mountains perfectly smooth, covered with herbage; and now suddenly found ourselves among crags, rocks, and precipices, as wild and hideous as any we had seen. "
Gatesgarth Dale, into which we soon entered, is indeed a very tremendous scene.
It had a peculiar character.
Its features were its own.
It was not a vista like the valley of Watenlath, nor had it any of the sudden turns of the valley of Borrowdale, but it wound slowly and solemnly in one large segment.
It was wider also than either of those valleys, being at least half a quarter of a mile from side to side.
The area of this valley is in general concave; the sides almost perpendicular, composed of a kind of broken craggy rock, the ruins of which every where strew the valley, and give it still more the image of desolation.
The river also, which runs through it, and is the principal supply of the lake, is as wild as the valley itself. "
As we proceeded, the grandeur of the valley increased.
But we found the mountains so overhung with clouds, that we could form little judgment of their height.
Our guide told us they were twice as high as we could see.
The middle of the valley is adorned, as these valleys in some parts are, by a craggy hill, on the top of which stands the fragment of a rock that looks, in Ossian's language, like the stone of power, the rude deity of desolation, to which the scene is sacred. "
The vale of Buttermere, which extends many miles below the lake, is a wide variegated scene, full of rising and falling grounds, woody in many parts, well inhabited in some; fruitful and luxuriant in all.
In the cheerful and healthful looks of the inhabitants, we met new proofs of the narrow limits in which all the real wants of life are comprised."
Mary Of Buttermere.
-- In the village of Buttermere, which is pleasantly situated on the eastern borders of the vale, lived Mary Robinson, remarkable for her beauty and her misfortunes.
She was the daughter of an innkeeper, and had long lived in this sequestered spot, as content and happy as virtue and innocence could render her.
Her beauty, which required no decorations of art, was the theme of many a shepherd's song; and so unsullied was her reputation, that scandal had never ventured to circulate a tale to her dishonour.
Such was Mary Robinson in 1802, when she had the misfortune to give her hand and affection to a person of the name of Hatfield, an outlaw and a fugitive from justice.
This artful impostor, who had long violated the laws of his country, was tried at Carlisle, in 1803, on a charge of forgery, convicted, and executed.
He married Mary in the autumn of 1802, having some time prior to that period assumed the name and titles of the Honourable Colonel Hope, a character he was qualified to support, as far as the graces of exterior behaviour could support it.
His manners and address were easy and elegant; and his conversation, though evincing no great powers, had its attractions.
The author of A Fortnight's Ramble to the Lakes brought Mary first into public notice, by the following tribute to her beauty:--" Her mother and she were spinning woollen yarn in the back kitchen.
On our going into it the girl flew away as swift as a mountain sheep, and it was not until our return from Scale Force that we could say we first saw her.
She brought in part of our dinner, and seemed to be about fifteen.
Her hair was thick and long, of a dark brown, and, though unadorned with ringlets, did not seems to want them; her face was a fine oval, with full eyes, and lips as red as vermillion; her cheeks had more of the lily than the rose; and, although she had never been out of the village( and I hope will have no ambition to wish it), she had a manner about her which seemed better calculated to set off dress than adorn her.
She was a very Lavinia, " Seeming, when unadorned, adorned the most."
Such was Mary as represented by the author in 1792, at the age of fifteen.
In the winter of 1797, the writer of the" Ramble" revisited Buttermere, to settle an account, he says, with his own mind, and to do away any false pride which the encomiums bestowed on so young a person might have produced.
At that time he found Mary Robinson, though not a perfect beauty, possessed of a heavenly countenance, and in every point of manners fitted -- To shine in courts with unaffected ease. "
My dinner," he says," being cold corned sirloin of most marbled beef, was soon ready, and a fire in a small room prepared for me.
I was waited upon by Mary, and contrived to joke much; the dirtiness of the walls gave me a fine opportunity; for I observed writing in Greek, in Latin, in French, and English, upon them, all about her, and which I gave her to understand were the probable reasons of the walls not having been lately white-washed.
Her denial too much crimsoned her face for me to believe her; and the next morning I saw the compliments in English were rubbed out. "
The weather was lowering; and I did not wish, in case of a downfall, to be entombed in Buttermere; therefore, taking the opportunity of being alone, I told her, I knew the author of" A Fortnight's Ramble," and as such, had something to say to her.
She curtsied respectfully; and taking her by the hand, I began: " Mary, I wrote it, and rejoice in having had such an opportunity of minutely observing the propriety of your behaviour.
You may remember, I advised you in that book never to leave your native valley.
Your age and situation require the utmost care.
Strangers will come, and have come, purposely to see you; and some of them with very bad intentions.
We hope you will never suffer from them; but never cease to be upon your guard.
You really are not so handsome as you promised to be; and I have long wished, by conversation like this, to do away what mischief the flattering character I gave of you may expose you to.
Be merry and wise.
She told me she sincerely thanked me, and said, I hope, Sir, I ever have, and trust I always shall, take care of myself."
The amiable author of the Ramble, in another part of his book, deplores that he ever wrote in commendation of this young person, and observes that it would be happy for many a flower, were they " Born to blush unseen."
A general respect towards Mary was produced by her sufferings.
Indeed, during this arduous period, her conduct was regulated by such good sense and becoming manners as to excite universal interest and commiseration.
Having borne her misfortunes with resignation and humility, she re-settled in her native valley, and married a young man from the neighbourhood of Carlisle.
They occupy the inn that was kept by her father; and tourists will find at their house good refreshments, ready attention, and moderate charges.
It is easy to discern a silent sadness in the deportment of Mary, sympathizing with the distresses of her heart; while she submits with a dignified calmness to be the subject of a publicity, to which her misfortunes, not her birth, have exposed her.
She is of a dark complexion and good figure, and has an aspect of settled pensiveness.
Some years ago she wore an attire of deep mourning.
But the pity and protection for which her misfortunes and her innocence so eloquently pleaded, and which her return to the duties of a menial station so powerfully claimed, were not sufficient to shelter her from the merciless brutality of the curious and unfeeling.
Some taunted her with the imputation of credulity; others inveighed against her public demonstration of a still surviving grief, in the choice of her apparel.
Such cruelties were surely needless to draw afresh the tears of memory!-- Alas!
in the ear of Mary, Flebile nescio quid queritur lyra, flebile lingua Murmurat exanimis; respondent flebile ripae.
Ovid.
Met.
Down Hebrus' tide, the silver lyre unstrung, Makes mournful cadence as it floats along; The lifeless tongue still wafts a mournful sigh, And mournfully the listening shores reply.
Ovid's Orph.
And Euryd.
A descriptive Tour to the Lakes in 1804.
Scale Force.
About a mile and a half from the village of Buttermere is Scale Force, an astonishing waterfall, which, being difficult of access, is rarely visited, but which every tourist, whose curiosity leads him to visit these romantic regions, ought to see.
This fall is nearly two hundred feet; and it excels that of Niagara about fifty feet.
There are two ways of approaching this cataract: one is by water, across Crummock Lake, which is about half a mile; the other is by land, from Buttermere, and is a mile and a half.
After crossing the Cocker, which runs between the lakes of Buttermere and Crummock, the road leads over a boggy pasture, scattered with detached stones; whilst the mountain on the left, the sides of which at a distance appear covered with thick wood, displays on a nearer approach only a few straggling trees, interspersed among the rocks.
An opening between the mountains of Mellbreak and Blea Crag, shows the course to this object of curiosity.
After crossing the pasture, you arrive at a wall, close under Blea Crag, one of the most rugged mountains in this wild country.
Here a large fissure, extending nearly one hundred feet into the mountain, presents itself.
On advancing through this frightful chasm, which is about four or five yards wide, and fenced on each side by perpendicular rock, the waterfall appears, pouring down a height of nearly two hundred feet in one unbroken stream, with a noise that seems to shake the mountain.
The steep on each side is covered with a variety of moss, fern, ash, and oak, which are all fed by the constant spray, and flourish in indescribable verdure.
The mountains on each side of the chasm rise to an immense height, and add considerably to the awe which the solitude and wildness of the scenery cannot fail to produce.
Some large trees grow from the fissures near the summit of the mountain, and throw a shade on the cavern below, which of itself is sufficiently dreadful, without any other appendages of horror.
The spray, occasioned by the falling water, rises in the form of a thick mist, and fills that part of the cavity.
If this cataract be visited on the day succeeding heavy rain, it will be seen in all its grandeur: the body of water which is precipitated will almost fill the chasm; violent strife will exist between rock and water; the mountain itself will seem to shake with the struggle; and the noise, as loud as that of a peal of thunder, will alarm the most intrepid ear.
If it be visited eight or nine days after rain, the scene will be less grand and astonishing; but every part will be at such time in unison with the music created by the fall.
This waterfall excels the celebrated one at Coo in Germany.
Crummock Water.
The road to Crummock Water from the village of Buttermere is through groves and pleasant fields to the banks of the lake, which recedes to the right under a rocky promontory, called Randon Knot, or Buttermere Hawse.
From the side of this rock is a view of the whole extent of the lake, which is beautifully ornamented with three islands.
One of these islands is a naked rock; and the others are covered with wood.
This lake is of an oblong form, about three miles in length, and half a mile in breadth, and one mile distant from that of Buttermere.
Its western margin is surrounded by Mellbreak and other lofty mountains, whose mighty steeps descend to the edge of the water, and leave few tracts for cultivation.
The whole eastern shore is diversified with bays, and is marked by a rich scene of cultivated lands, and of small coppices which shoot out into various promontories.
A sweetly-situated farm displays its rural scenery opposite the middle of the lake, at the foot of a dell which separates Grasmer from Buttermere Hawse.
At the foot of the lake, a beautiful hill, partly woody and partly cultivated, forms a prominent object; and beyond it are seen the sloping cultivated fields of Lowes Water.
The chain of mountains on each side of this narrow vale is extremely picturesque.
They rise from distinct bases, and assume the most grotesque forms of serrated or broken rocks. "
The two lakes( that of Buttermere and Crummock Water) bear a great resemblance to each other.
Both are oblong; both wind round promontories; and both are surrounded by mountains.
But the lower lake is near a mile longer than the upper one; the lines it forms are much easier; and though it has less wood on its banks, the loss is compensated by a richer display of rocky scenery.
The forms of these rocks are in general beautiful; most of them being broken into grand square surfaces.
With this rocky scenery much hilly ground is intermixed.
Patches of meadow also, here and there, on the banks of the lake, improve the variety."
Gilpin.
Crummock Water, like that of Buttermere, is very deep and clear, and abounds with char, which generally weigh from six to eight ounces each.
The outlet of this lake is at the northeast corner, by the River Cocker, over which is a handsome stone bridge, and which, after intersecting a pleasant country to Cockermouth, there enters the Derwent.
Lowes Water.
Cross the Cocker, and proceed by High Cross to Lowes Water, a small and beautiful lake, about a mile in length and a quarter of a mile in breadth.
From a station near the gate that leads to the common, this lake is seen to great advantage, and spreads out to the eye in one beautiful sheet of water.
Groves, woods, and waving inclosures, with farms situated in the finest points of view, adorn the extremities, while a chain of lofty mountains overlooks the southern shore.
The village of Lowes Water is charmingly situated close to the lake, under the lofty Mellbreak.
The beautiful and romantic character of this country is preserved in all its simplicity, by every village and cottage harmonizing exactly both in form and colour with the scenery amid which they stand.
The sentiment excited, while contemplating the steril rock or the magnificent mountain, or admiring the beautiful vale, is never here disturbed by the introduction of objects at variance with the impression made on the mind by the fine works of nature.
The lake of Lowes Water, contrary to all the other lakes, has its course from north to south, and under the mountain Mellbreak falls into Crummock Water.
It produces pike, perch, and some trout; but it has no char, probably on account of the shallowness of the water.
A fine evening view of this lake, and of that of Crummock, may be taken from the side of Mellbreak, in the road to Ennerdale. "
Nothing," says a late writer," exceeds, in composition, the parts of this landscape.
They are all great, and lie in fine order of perspective.
If the view be taken from the round knoll at the lower end of the lake, the appearance of the mountains that bound it is astonishing.
You have Mellbreak on the right, and Grasmer on the left, and betwixt them a stupendous amphitheatre of mountains, whose tops are all broken and dissimilar, and of different hues, and their bases skirted with wood, or clothed with verdure.
In the centre-point of this amphitheatre is a huge pyramidal broken rock, that seems with its figure to change, as you move across the fore-ground, and gives much variety to the scenes, and alters the picture at every pace.
In short, the picturesque views in this district are many, some mixed, others pure and sublime, but all surprise and please.
The genius of the greater adepts in landscape might here improve in taste and judgment; and the most enthusiastic ardour for pastoral poetry and painting will here find an inexhaustible source of scenes and images."
Mr. West.
Vale Of Lorton.
Proceed from Lowes Water by Brackenthwaite to the vale of Lorton.
At Scale Hill, a commodious inn, which soon presents itself after quitting Lowes Water, it might not be improper to hire a guide to the summit of a craggy eminence, about half a mile from the inn, whence the traveller will be gratified with a view of rich variety.
On one side is spread a bird's eye landscape of immense extent, and terminated by the vale of Lorton, watered by the River Cocker.
The inclosures of waving corn and rich green pastures stretch half way up the mountain's sides, while groups of the neatest cottages seek a shelter in the hanging wood, or skirt themselves with mountain verdure.
Exactly over the head frowns the ferocious Grasmer.
On the right, Crummock Water appears in a novel and much more advantageous view; from this considerable elevation, the numerous little bays which wash the mountain's feet come boldly into sight; and as we comprise, in a single turn, the various bearings and intersections of all these noble ramparts, which are streaked with a red brown crust, and strikingly resemble copper, the harmony of the whole presents a far more pleasing coup d' oeil than could be imagined by the traveller, who, on the margin of the lake, sees a solitary part of them.
Farther west is a glimpse of Lowes Water.
In short, this point would afford an admirable panorama.
A Descriptive Tour to the Lakes in 1804.
At Brackenthwaite, in September, 1760, happened one of the most dreadful inundations ever recorded, occasioned by the bursting of a waterspout.
It fell upon Grasmer, and after deluging the whole side of the mountain, descended into the plain, and was received by some arable ground.
Its violence here first appeared; and it carried before it trees, soil, and gravel, and laid all bare to the naked rock.
It seems to have made an immense roll over the next ten acres, which it covered with so vast a bed of stones, that no human art can ever again restore the soil.
On the banks of the Lissa, a contracted rivulet, are the vestiges of a stony channel, almost sufficient to contain the waters of the Rhine or the Danube.
It was computed, that in many parts the stream must have been five or six yards in depth, and nearly a hundred in breadth; and if we consider the velocity of this great body of water, we shall find its force almost equal to any effect.
The village of Brackenthwaite narrowly escaped, by means of the projection of a rock, which resisted the current, and gave it another direction.
But its effects on a stone causeway were most surprising, as, from its extraordinary strength and massiveness, this fabric seemed to bid defiance to all external violence.
It was of great thickness, and supported on each side by an enormous bank of earth.
The memory of man could trace this causeway, unaltered in any particular, for nearly a hundred years: but by the soundness and firmness of its parts and texture, it seemed as if it had stood for ages; and it was almost a doubt whether it were a work of nature or of art.
This massy mole the deluge not only carried away; but, as if it turned it into sport, made its very foundations the channel of its own stream.
A ride down the vale of Lorton must highly gratify the traveller, who wishes to view nature in her placid features. "
No lakes, no rocks," observes Mr. Gilpin," are here to blend the ideas of dignity and grandeur with that of beauty.
All is simplicity and repose.
Nature, in this scene, lays totally aside her majestic frown, and wears only a lovely smile. "
The vale of Lorton is of the extended kind, running a considerable way between mountains, which range at about a mile's distance.
They are near enough to screen it from the storm, and yet not so impending as to exclude the sun.
Their sides, though not smooth, are not much diversified.
A few knolls and hollows just give a little variety to the broad lights and shades, which overspread them. "
This vale, which enjoys a rich soil, is in general a rural cultivated scene; though in many parts the ground is beautifully broken and abrupt.
A bright stream, which might almost take the name of a river, pours along a rocky channel, and sparkles down in numberless little cascades.
Its banks are adorned with wood, and varied with different objects; a bridge, a mill, a hamlet; a glade overhung with wood; or some little sweet recess, or natural vista, through which the eye ranges, between irregular trees, along the windings of the stream. "
Except the mountains, nothing in all this scenery is great; but every part is filled with sweet engaging passages of nature, which tend to soothe the mind and instil tranquillity: --" The passions to divine repose Persuaded yield; and love and joy alone Are waking;-- love and joy such as await An angel's meditation."
-- This vale, which is one of the most delightful places that the imagination can conceive, is about two miles and a half in length, and is watered by the River Cocker.
Here, as at Lowes Water, every village, house, and cottage, is placed in the choicest site, and in perfect unison with the surrounding scenery.
At Stanger, two miles north of Lorton, is a saline spring, which possesses properties greatly resembling those of the Cheltenham waters.
Ennerdale Water.
This lake is situated about four miles south of Lowes Water, whence it may be visited; but the most convenient mode of approaching Ennerdale is by a circuitous route by Lamplugh, and entering the vale on the west of the lake, which, except on that side, is defended by mountains almost impassable.
Persons who have leisure, and a taste for a variety of mountain and pastoral scenery, will not be disappointed in a ride to Ennerdale.
Though there is nothing very striking in the features of this lake, yet it is not without its beauties.
It is two miles and a half in length, and in some parts three quarters of a mile in breadth.
Gillerthwaite, which is a narrow tract of cultivated land, formed into a peninsula on the lake, particularly draws the attention of the traveller.
The verdure and fertility of this peninsula receive additional beauties, when contrasted with the barren mountains by which it is environed.
An essayist has observed of this place, that" it forms a picture such as the canvas never presented; it embraces a variety so distributed as no pencil can ever imitate.
No designer of romance ever allotted such a residence to his fairy inhabitants: I had almost said, no recluse ever wooed religion in such a blessed retirement.
The genius of Ovid would have transformed the most favoured of his heroes into a river, and poured his waters into the channel of the Lissa, there to wander by the verdant bounds of Gillerthwaite-- the sweet reward of patriotism and virtue."
This is all very fine, and very much in the manner of romance writing.
If the author of the observations had passed the winter months in one of the solitary huts of Gillerthwaite, and had heard the war of elements on the mountainous desert by which it is surrounded, he would, in all possibility, have imbibed more just ideas, and would have described Gillerthwaite with less rapture.
From Gillerthwaite the road leads to How Hall, once a stately mansion belonging to the Patricksons, and erected, as appears from an inscription over the principal door, in the year 1566.
It was lately the property of John Tiffin Senhouse, Esq.
of Calder Abbey, into whose family it came by purchase.
The situation of this mansion, once the seat of splendour, is very romantic; and a better station cannot be selected for a general view of the lake and vale of Ennerdale.
Sty Head, Honistar Crag, Wastdale, the Pillar, and Red Pike, compose the mountain scenery of this dreary region.
Honistar Crag and the Pillar rise to an immense height.
The former, if viewed from the road that leads from Borrowdale Hawse to Buttermere, seems in horrible grandeur to elevate himself to the skies; and disdaining to be encumbered with a blade of grass, this mountain wears a most dreary and inhospitable aspect.
Viewing the dark gray sides of Honistar Crag, you behold him with terror, and see the dreadful summit of the mountain above your heads; as the pale mariner on an unknown shore observes the dark clouds which bear the tempest in their bosom.
The scenery around Honistar exhibits a view of extreme sterility and wildness.
Excursion to the Highlands of Scotland and the English Lakes, 1805.
The eastern and western sides of Honistar Crag are flanked by the two conic mountains, Fleetwith and Scarf.
The base of Red Pike, so called from its ferruginous colour, is watered by the Lissa, along the margin of which is an excellent road, formed by the hand of nature, and presenting to the eye the appearance of pavement.
When the traveller passes the foot of the mountain called the Pillar, he will discover a vista, which cannot fail to afford astonishment and pleasure to the most indifferent observer.
Winlatter Road.
This road leads from Lorton to Keswick, and presents to the eye a scenery generally new, and always pleasing. "
In some parts you catch the prospect of small recesses, where some cottages stand in a solitude, romantic, and highly pastoral: in other parts you look down from such tremendous precipices, on whose brink you are travelling, that, from the windows of a carriage, the aspect and situation are alarming.
The lake of Bassenthwaite looks from thence like a gloomy abyss, and the vale above Keswick, with the ake of Derwent Water, appears as enchanted ground, where the scene seems realized which was imagined by the ingenious author of the Prince of Abyssinia, in which the young hero of his narrative was held secluded from the busy world by encircling mountains.
Skiddaw, shrouded with vapours, appears to nod its drowsy head; and innumerable eminences, one behind another, push their fronts to the view, and crowd the horizon with enormous objects.
From this pass, where the road becomes more level, you are inclosed by mountains on each hand, at whose feet the path lies, and whose summits are not to be reached by the traveller's eye, who passes so immediately under them, as they rise almost perpendicularly.
A fine verdure covers most of them, and they afford excellent sheep walks; others are barren, bleak, and shivery, sending down continued streams of sand, slates, and stones, with every shower of rain.
The contrast makes the vast objects agreeable to the eye."
Hutchinson's History of Cumberland. "
At Swinside," says another writer," the country opened, and discovered by far the most imposing tout ensemble of the vale of Keswick.
In a bottom on our left, we looked upon enclosures of silken verdure; and beyond them, Bassenthwaite Water expanded itself beneath a coverlet of deep shade.
At a distance of three miles, the giant frontiers of the lake of Keswick arose, broken by broad interspaces, which the spectator is left to fill with the creations of his fancy.
This is the point from which the eye of a stranger should first open upon these vestiges of an earthly paradise.
Nothing is seen but what is characteristic of grandeur, or of beauty.
Nature had left a void in many an outlined glen, or broken vista, and just inspires the beholder with a taste to finish it to perfection; this she never accomplishes of herself, and the spell of imagination dissolves into an instant and dull satiety, by a single effort to extend a boundary so magically fixed.
Art could never have contrived to throw the veil so delicately over the scenes of fiction."
A Descriptive Tour to the Lakes in 1804.
Mr. Gilpin traversed this mountainous region in a tempestuous summer evening, when every object had assumed a new, and even a more surprising appearance.
His description is too beautiful not to be transcribed. "
The evening( he observes), which grew more tempestuous, began to close upon us, as we left the more beautiful parts of the vale of Lorton.
We were still more than six miles from Keswick, and had before us a very wild country, which probably would have afforded no great amusement even in full day; but amid the obscurity which now overspread the landscape, the imagination was left at large, and painted many images, which perhaps did not really exist, upon the dead colouring of nature.
Every great and pleasing form, whether clear or obscure, which we had seen during the day, now played in strong imagery before the fancy; as when the grand chorus ceases, ideal music vibrates in the ear. "
In one part, a view pleased us much, though perhaps in stronger light it might have escaped notice.
The road made a sudden dip into a little winding valley, which, being too abrupt for a carriage, was eased by a bridge; and the form of the arch was what we commonly find in Roman aqueducts; at least such it appeared to us.
The winding road, the woody valley, and broken ground below, the mountain beyond, the form of the bridge, which gave a classic air to the scene, and the obscurity which melted the whole into one harmonious mass, made altogether a very pleasing view. "
But it soon grew too dark, even for the imagination to roam.
It was now ten o'clock; and, though in this northern climate the twilight of a clear summer evening affords, even at that late hour, a bright effulgence, yet now all was dark.
-- A faint erroneous ray Glanced from the imperfect surfaces of things, Threw half an image on the straining eye.
While wavering woods, and villages, and streams, And rocks, and mountain-tops, that long retained The ascending gleam, were all one swimming scene, Uncertain if beheld.
-- " We could just discern, through the dimness of the night, the shadowy forms of the mountains, sometimes blotting out half the sky on one side, and sometimes winding round, as a gloomy barrier, on the other. "
Often too the road would appear to dive into some dark abyss, a cataract roaring at the bottom; while the mountain torrents on every side in notes of various cadence, as their quantities of water, the declivities of their fall, their distances, or the intermission of the blast, brought the sound fuller or fainter to the ear, which organ became now more alert, as the imagination depended more upon it than on the eye for information. "
These various notes of water-music, answering each other from hill to hill, were a kind of translation of that passage in the Psalms, in which one deep is represented calling another, because of the noise of the water-pipes. "
Among other images of the night, a lake,( for the lake of Bassenthwaite was now in view), appeared through the uncertainty of the gloom, like something of an ambiguous texture, spreading a lenghtened gleam of wan, dead light under the dark shade of the incumbent mountains; but whether this light was owing to vapours arising from the valley, or whether it was water-- and if water, whether it was an arm of the sea, a lake, or a river-- to the uninformed traveller would appear a matter of great uncertainty.
Whatever it was, it would seem sufficient to alarm his apprehensions, and to raise in his fancy,( now in quest of dangers), the idea of something that might stop his further progress. "
A good turnpike road, on which we entered near the village of Lorton, and a knowledge of the country, set at nought all such ideas with us; but it may easily be conceived, that a traveller, wandering in the midst of a stormy night, in a mountainous country, unknown and unbeaten by human footsteps, might feel palpitations of a very uneasy kind."
Legberthwaite.
After having described the lakes and scenery in the neighbourhood of Keswick, we shall now conduct the tourist towards Ambleside.
For a mile from Keswick the road continues to ascend, and presents in succession a variety of beautiful views.
From Castle Rig is seen the vale of Keswick in all its beauty, including the lakes of Derwent and Bassenthwaite, the river flowing through the intervening meadows, the surrounding mountains, and the vale of Newlands.
Mr. Gray was so charmed with this prospect that it almost determined him to return to Keswick, and repeat his tour.
A late writer, however, observes that" it is a bird's eye view of the vale, discovering a large extent of variegated inclosure, to the exclusion of those points from which is derived its particular and prominent character.
Of the lake of Derwent by much the finer part lies concealed; the poor town of Keswick is an unassimilated and discordant feature at the bottom; nor is there any picture in the naked object of Crosthwaite church.
The river, however, it must be admitted, is creative of considerable interest in its vagaries from lake to lake.
Skiddaw rears his giant head at a respectful point of distance, and the lower boundary of Bassenthwaite Lake, which is naked and uninteresting beyond description, is happily shut out from the view."
Hence, the same writer is of opinion, that the fervor of composition, displayed by Mr. Gray, in his rapturous encomiums of this prospect, appears in this instance to have a little" overstepped the modesty of nature."
A Descriptive Tour to the Lakes in 1804.
The road now descends, and skirting the head of a vale on the north, called Naddle Vale, turns more south, and enters the valley of Legberthwaite by Smathwaite Bridge.
Legberthwaite is a narrow valley, interspersed with a few cottages and inclosures, and bounded by rocks and precipices on the left.
The lower part of the vale is contracted into a deep dell, through which Leathes Water takes its course, till it joins the Greta at Newby Bridge, at the foot of Threlkeld Fell.
Leathes Water, Or Wythburn Water.
After some miles, the road passes the base of" the mighty Helvellyn," and Leathes Water, sometimes called Wythburn, or Thirlmere Water, appears in sight.
This lake is a narrow irregular sheet of water, indented with numerous little bays, and is about four miles in length, and in no part more than one mile in breadth.
On its eastern side it skirts the immense base of Helvellyn, and receives supplies from numerous torrents that precipitate themselves down the sides of that huge mountain, and of other surrounding mountains, which cast a deep brown shade over the surface of the water.
Through the greater part of its length, no tufted verdure graces the banks of this lake, nor hanging woods throw rich reflections on its surface; but every form which it suggests is savage and desolate.
The effect of this scene is greatly heightened by the immense craggy masses which seem to hang on the sides of Helvellyn, whence they have apparently been severed by some mighty convulsion of nature.
Some of them are seen shelving into the lake, while other masses have reached the bottom, and are at rest in the silent water.
-- The storms are up; and from yon sable cloud Down rush the rains; while,' mid the thunder loud, The viewless eagles in wild screams rejoice.
The echoes answer to the unearthly noise Of hurling rocks, that plunged into the lake Send up a sullen groan.
-- Wilson.
It received this name from the ancient family of Leathes at Dale Head, whose property it has been for many generations.
One peculiar feature belongs to Leathes Water, which distinguishes it from all the other lakes in Cumberland and Westmorland.
About the middle of the lake, the land projects upwards of three hundred feet, till the shores on each side nearly unite, and contract the water to the size of a small river, which is rapid, but not very deep.
Over the lake, at this narrow peninsula, an alpine bridge of three arches has been thrown, consisting only of one or two strong oaken planks, with a hand-rail for the security of passengers.
The approach to this bridge is over a rude causeway of rough stones, upon which the arches are fixed; and immediately beyond these the lake resumes its former breadth.
The west edge of the lake swells into a little promontory, decorated with a neat manor-house shrouded in trees; but the objects of greatest beauty are a group of rocks, which raise the closing screen of the landscape.
These wear a variety of figure and ornament; some of them are pyramidal, and dressed in green wood to the very summits; others are magnificently turreted, and project boldly, as if to show their naked sides of silver gray.
In the back ground are seen the broad gloomy ridges of Saddleback and Threlkeld Fells, hung with a pall of the deepest sable.
The beauties of this lake are seen to most advantage from the west side, from a road which is passable only by horsemen, or on foot, and which leads along the shore of the lake for nearly three miles.
This road along the west shore is in some parts steep; in others, where there is a declivity, rivulets flow across it; and sometimes it proceeds along the margin of the lake, from which it is occasionally excluded by intervening rocks.
Throughout its whole length it is completely overhung by part of the stupendous fells of Borrowdale; and on the left of the road are scattered huge fragments of rock, which had been precipitated from the mountains by repeated storms.
The deep waters of this lake are singularly clear; and accordingly, as the sun shines, or is concealed by the dense clouds that cover the summits of the neighbouring mountains, Leathes Water reflects the various objects with uncommon beauty.
Frequently the winds, descending from the surrounding mountains, agitate The brown bosom of the lake Into a thousand, thousand, sparkling waves, Rocking the trees, or driving cloud on cloud Upon the sharp edge of yon lofty crags.
Wordsworth's Excursion.
On the east side of the lake is a rock, which projects into the water, and which is known by the name of" Clark's Leap," from the circumstance of a person of that name, who, being jealous of his wife, precipitated himself into Leathes Water, in conformity with her advice-- a singular instance of complaisance, which, it is presumed, has few parallels either in ancient or modern times.
Mr. Clarke, in his" Survey of the Lakes," says that he heard the story from the woman herself, who was then( in 1787) living.
Leathes Water is seen to great advantage from an eminence on the left of the road at the sixth mile-post, and from another which rises behind Dale Head house.
Helvellyn.
This mighty mountain, whose base forms the eastern boundary of Leathes Water for a considerable extent, is situated partly in the county of Cumberland, and partly in that of Westmorland.
It is one of the most conspicuous among those rugged and barren objects, which are seen from the western side of the lake that has been just described.
It is a mountain of tremendous grandeur, upon whose brow the snows hang as upon a glacier.
According to the trigonometrical survey, it is three thousand and fifty - five feet above the level of the sea, and exceeds Skiddaw in height by thirty - three feet.
The view from its summit, which is extremely difficult of access, is very extensive and magnificent, and its descent is difficult, being incommoded by loose stones, small rocks, or hard dry ground.
The author of" A Fortnight's Ramble" visited Helvellyn from Ambleside, and has given the following descriptive account of this excursion:--" Before four o'clock in the morning we set off.
We began our course by Rydal Hall, guided by Robin Partridge; and, as we surmounted the first hills, took advantage of the morning to exert ourselves.
We did not see the sun rise, but observed with pleasure its side influence at a distance.
We passed the long chain until we came to Fairfield, which composes that grand crescent every person upon Windermere looks up to with such respect.
In the rear is Flinty Grove in Deepdale Head, where we look down into the entrance of Patterdale, and over the champaign part of Westmorland, including a large part of Cumberland.
Angle Tarn, famous for fish, cuts the centre of the mountain before us; and, though but small, is deserving of note.
The grove takes its name from small flints, and appears as if it had never produced one blade of verdure-- whilst its neighbour, St. Sunday Crag, is a bold mossy contrast. "
At one time we saw seven pieces of water; and, as the tide was coming in on the Lancaster sands, we had many salt-water lakes, which were terminated by the western sea, an expanse of blue, far as the eye could reach, and throwing all the lakes in the world out of sight; for, wherever the ocean is to be seen, the eye imperceptibly rests upon it; and, I dare say, if a man was in a contemplative mood, and had an opportunity of looking at fine land prospects on one side, and the sea on the other, he would forsake substance for surface-- with such intuition does the mind dwell upon an expanse of water, skirted by the horizon. "
At a quarter past seven, after a tight tug, we reached a mountain that would make a fine race-course.
We then steeply descended to a tarn, half a mile below us, and had a bird's eye view of Grasmere; at the same time looking over Helm Crag, which has a ferruginous appearance, descending towards the tarn, which we judged to be of an amazing depth from its very dark look.
This water is hid in three mountains, headed by Seat Sandal. "
We then clambered to a heap of stones upon Grisedale Pike, or, as it is called by the country people in remembrance of some rustic fun, Dolly Waggon Pike; and I may venture to say she has a more commanding prospect than any Dolly in the kingdom.
To the west, immense mountains that hide the vale of Borrowdale, shewing three lakes, and the sea bounding them: to the east, fleecy clouds are rolling about the hills; and she appears( from our situation) the head of a delightful valley, and of Ullswater, plainly shewing us Gowbarrow Park, Dunmallet Head, and the outlet of the lake. "
On Whelp Side we see Bassenthwaite lake; and after declining, in order to ascend the southeast flank of Helvellyn, a hill, a mile long, extends to the eastward; so very narrow, you might apparently sit across any part of the ridge.
The clouds are flying before the wind, and reflect their shadows so fantastically, that beggars what we admired when upon Windermere. "
At half past nine we reached Helvellyn Man, the highest point of this famous mountain.
The view is growing more hazy; still the magnificence around us is beyond description; mountains towering above hills, as if they were parents of numerous families, and Helvellyn is the centre of them.
Skiddaw is below us to the north.
Cross Fell is large enough to be visible from an exalted summit, and is only exceeded by Ingleborough in Yorkshire, which holds her crowned head amidst a chain of hills, and seems from her height deserving of her royal appearance. "
Old Man is just in sight, and Old Friends ought not to be forgotten.
Place Fell cuts off a branch of Ullswater, and makes the shape of the lake resemble a pair of breeches, inlaid with pasturage upon ground called the Old Church, because there had probably been one there, and which is as rich as nature and industry can make it.
Just under is Red Tarn, shaped like a Bury pear: if I had but a draught of it, it would be worth all the fruit in the world, for my tongue cleaves to the roof of my mouth.
Ravens are croaking; and the wind, which did not blow when I began to write, is coming on in whistling flurries.
The six magnificent mountains we looked up to with such admiration when we went to Patterdale, were under Helvellyn; and the idea struck me that I was their superior.
Great part of the mossy sheathing is either washed away by torrents of rain, or disrobed by whirlwinds, perhaps by both; and I should not wonder if it would soon be bare, for when a rent is once made, it must give way. "
After our luxurious banquet, we descended progressively, until we came to another range, which was steep and unpleasant, being covered with loose stones we could not trust to.
We then came to that rise which is only seen from the high road, and which is often supposed the top of the mountain.
Here we opened upon the peaceful view of Wythburn, beautiful though unadorned with trees; its crooked-sided lake, from the darkness of its colour, must be very deep.
I took an opportunity of resting upon a snug sheep-birth, that was almost and asylum to me, for we were obliged to traverse with the utmost caution, the ground was so hard and steep; and, although I was master of my resolution, as I had only one arm to depend upon, the hand of which was wearily blistered, I would not, whilst descending, have looked at any thing but my feet for all the prospects in the universe.
At a spring about two hundred yards below Helvellyn Man.
It appears that their guide might have directed them down an easier descent; but not having been in bed the preceding night, he was induced from fatigue to take them the nearest way. "
However, between ten and eleven we found ourselves in the high road, and tript lightly to the Cherry Tree, a public house half way between Ambleside and Keswick, where they gave us a breakfast fit for labouring men.
We concluded this morning walk was very near thirty miles along a range of hills; for although we rose up some of them slowly, we could not help sometimes descending very fast.
From the point where we began to mount Rydall Hill, to the part of the road where we descended, was nine miles upon a level; and we had above a mile to return to the Cherry Tree, which lengthened our time to above seven hours."
In the spring of 1805, a young gentleman of talents, and of a most amiable disposition, who was making a solitary tour, and had left Patterdale with the hopes of reaching Wythburn, unhappily trusted too much to his own local knowledge, lost his way, and perished beneath" the dark brow of the mighty Helvellyn."
This gentleman, whose name was Charles Gough, had inquired at Patterdale for a guide to Wythburn; but there being, as we believe, a review of the volunteers in the neighbourhood on that day, no person could be procured to direct him.
It snowed too on that day.
He was, therefore, advised to remain at Patterdale till the day following; but unhappily he did not comply with this advice.
The remains of this unfortunate gentleman were not discovered till three months afterwards, when they were found guarded by a faithful female terrier, his constant attendant during his rambles through the wilds of Cumberland and Westmorland.
This affecting incident gave rise to the following exquisite poem by Mr. Walter Scott, called Helvellyn, which we cannot withhold from our readers.
I climbed the dark brow of the mighty Helvellyn, Lakes and mountains beneath me gleamed misty and wide; All was still, save, by fits, when the eagle was yelling, And starting around me the echoes replied.
On the right Striden edge round the Red Tarn was bending, And to Catchedicam its left verge was defending, One huge nameless rock in the front was ascending, When I marked the sad spot where the wanderer had died.
Dark green was that spot' mid the brown mountain-heather, Where the Pilgrim of Nature lay stretched in decay, Like the corpse of an outcast abandoned to weather, Till the mountain-winds wasted the tenantless clay.
Nor yet quite deserted, though lonely extended, For, faithful in death, his mute favourite attended, The much-loved remains of her master defended, And chased the hill fox and the raven away.
How long didst thou think that his silence was slumber?
When the wind waved his garment how oft didst thou start?
How many long days and long nights didst thou number, Ere he faded before thee, the friend of thy heart!
And, oh!
was it meet, that, no requiem read over him, No mother to weep, and no friend to deplore him, And thou, little guardian, alone stretched before him,-- Unhonoured the pilgrim from life should depart?
When a prince to the fate of the peasant has yielded, The tapestry waves dark round the dim-lighted hall; With scutcheons of silver the coffin is shielded, And pages stand mute by the canopied pall: Through the courts, at deep midnight, the torches are gleaming; In the proudly-arched chapel the banners are beaming; Far adown the long aisle sacred music is streaming, Lamenting a chief of the people should fall.
But meeter for thee, gentle lover of nature, To lay down thy head like the meek mountain lamb; When, wildered, he drops from some cliff huge in stature, And draws his last sob by the side of his dam.
And more stately thy couch by this desert lake lying, Thy obsequies sung by the grey plover flying, With one faithful friend but to witness thy dying, In the arms of Helvellyn and Catchedicam.
Glenfinlas and other ballads, pp.
180-- 182.
Mr. Wordsworth has also lamented the untimely death of this young gentleman, in a beautiful poem entitled Fidelity, of which the following is the conclusion:-- But hear a wonder, for whose sake This lamentable tale I tell!
A lasting monument of words This wonder merits well.
The dog, which still was hovering nigh, Repeating the same timid cry, This dog had been through three months' space A dweller in that savage place.
Yes, proof was plain that since the day On which the traveller thus had died The dog had watched about the spot, Or by his master's side: How nourished here through such long time He knows, who gave that love sublime, And gave that strength of feeling, great Above all human estimate.
Poems by William Wordsworth, vol.
ii.
pp.
152, 153 Dunmail Raise.
Dunmail Raise stones are distant about nine miles from Keswick and two from Grasmere.
Antiquaries and tourists are by no means agreed concerning the history of this rude monument.
It stands on the side of the road, in the middle of the gap, or pass, between Cumberland and Westmorland, and is composed of a huge raise or heap of stones, piled on each side of an earthen mound.
This cairn is a few yards to the west of the gate which crosses the road. "
It consists," as Mr. Hutchinson observes," of pebble stones, to the sides of which the wall adjoins which distinguishes the boundaries of Cumberland and Westmorland, and consequently is conceived to prove its antiquity, as being prior to the division of counties: but that appears like begging the question, and the argument is not very specious."
It is said, that the bulk and dimensions of this cairn have of late years been greatly diminished, in consequence of stones being taken from it to repair the adjoining roads.
The generally received tradition concerning this pile is, that it was raised to commemorate the name and defeat of Dunmail, a petty king of Cumbria , A.D. 945, or 946, by the Saxon monarch, Edmund I., who slew his vanquished enemy, and, in conformity with the barbarous customs of that age, put out the eyes of his two sons; after which he bestowed the territories of Dunmail on his ally, Malcolm, King of Scotland, on condition that the latter should preserve in peace the northern parts of England.
This is not an improbable account, since Dunmail assisted the Northumbrians against Edmund; and Edmund, though victorious, was so weakened, that he durst not pursue Dunmail without the assistance of the Scots.
Malcolm, King of Scotland, joined Edmund with his forces, on condition that, if they were successful, Malcolm should possess Cumberland by paying homage to Edmund and his successors.
In this place, Dunmail determined to hazard a battle, which proved fatal to him.
Mr. Gilpin conjectures that this pile was probably intended to mark a division, not between the two counties of Cumberland and Westmorland, but rather between the two kingdoms of England and Scotland, in elder times, when the Scottish border extended beyond its present bounds.
He justly observes, that this chain of mountains seems to be a much more natural division of the two kingdoms, in this part, than the Esk, a little river in a champaign country, which now divides them.
But whatever may have been the design with which this monstrous pile was originally raised, it is, notwithstanding the change that it has suffered in its dimensions," one of those monuments of antiquity, which may be characterized by the scriptural phrase of remaining to this very day."
Grasmere Water.
Not far from Dunmail Raise the mountains open and discover the sweetly retired vale of Grasmere, with its beautiful lake, decorated with a fine green island, and margined with inclosures.
This vale of peace is about four miles in circumference, and is guarded by high mountains.
At the upper end is Helm Crag, a solitary conical mountain, which, at its highest point, bears a striking resemblance to an old woman cowering.
This circumstance is alluded to by Mr. Wordsworth, in noticing the effects of echo among these mountains, in the following beautiful lines:-- When I had gazed perhaps two minutes' space, Joanna, looking in my eyes, beheld That ravishment of mine, and laughed aloud.
The rock, like something starting from a sleep.
Took up the lady's voice, and laughed again: That ancient woman, seated on Helm Crag, Was ready with her cavern; Hammar Scar, And the tall steep of Silver How, sent forth A noise of laughter; southern Loughrigg heard, And Fairfield answered with a mountain tone: Helvellyn far into the clear blue sky Carried the lady's voice,-- old Skiddaw blew His speaking-trumpet;-- back out of the clouds Of Glaramara southward came the voice; And Kirkstone tossed it from his misty head.
A tall rock on the banks of the Rotha, a river that flows through the lakes of Grasmere and Rydal, and falls into Windermere. "
Most of the mountains here mentioned immediately surround the vale of Grasmere; of the others, some are at a considerable distance, but they belong to the same cluster."
-- Wordsworth.
Helm Crag is of a pyramidical form; and its summit is covered with pieces of rock, which give it the appearance of a grand ruin occasioned by an earthquake.
The view from the unfrequented top of this mountain, which is difficult of access, is said to be very extensive, comprising the whole of Windermere, Esthwaite Water, and Grasmere, with the intervening valley, divided into rich and highly cultivated inclosures, and seeming to contain almost every thing that can be beautiful in rural miniature.
The view into the vale of Grasmere from the road, after leaving Dunmail Raise, is thus described by Mr. Gray:--" Just beyond it is one of the sweetest landscapes that art ever attempted to imitate.
The bosom of the mountains spreading here into a broad basin, discovers in the midst Grasmere Water: its margin is hollowed into small bays, with bold eminences; some of rock, some of turf, that half conceal and vary the figure of the little lake they command; from the shore a low promontory pushes itself far into the water, and on it stands a white village, with the parish church rising in the midst of it; hanging inclosures, corn-fields, and meadows, green as emerald, with their trees, and hedges, and cattle, fill up the whole space from the edge of the water: just opposite to you is a large farmhouse, at the bottom of a deep smooth lawn, embosomed in old woods, which climb half way up the mountains' sides, and discover above them a broken line of crags that crown the scene.
Not a single red tile, no gentleman's flaring house, or garden walls, break in upon the repose of this little unsuspected paradise; but all is peace, rusticity, and happy poverty, in its neatest, most becoming attire."
The lake of Grasmere is about a mile in length, and, in some parts, nearly half a mile in breadth.
Near the centre of this truly rural lake rises a small green island, with an outhouse or barn upon it, which enhances the beauty of the scenery, and has given birth to some beautiful lines from the pen of Mr. Wordsworth: Thou seest a homely pile, yet to these walls The heifer comes in the snow-storm, and here The new-dropped lamb finds shelter from the wind.
And hither does one poet sometimes row His pinnace, a small vagrant barge, up-piled With plenteous store of heath and withered fern,( A lading which he with his sickle cuts Among the mountains,) and beneath this roof He makes his summer couch, and here at noon Spreads out his limbs, while, yet unshorn, the sheep Panting beneath the burthen of their wool Lie round him, even as if they were a part Of his own household: nor, while from his bed He through that door-place looks toward the lake And to the stirring breezes, does he want Creations lovely as the work of sleep, Fair sights-- and visions of romantic joy!
On each side of the lake is a road, one leading to Ambleside, the other to Hawks Head.
The margin of the lake is covered with the softest verdure.
Of the vale of Grasmere Mr. Hutchinson has given the following description:--" It contains in circumference about four miles, consisting of meadow and pasture ground.
From an eminence, a little distance from the church, we viewed the whole circle, delighted with the scene.
The fields were clothed in fresh verdure; the vale was graced with some humble cottages dispersed on the borders of the lake, among which the sacred fane, with its white tower, stood solemnly superior.
The hills were here and there patched with a few trees, and their slope enlivened by flocks of sheep that broused on each declivity.
This seemed to us to be the vale of peace."
History of Cumberland, vol.
ii.
p. 223.
The church is a small neat edifice, containing some tombs of the ancient family of Fleming at Rydal, who have a burial-place in it, and are proprietors of the advowson.
The interior of the church is fitted up in the simplest manner imaginable, consisting only of a few pews, the other seats being oaken benches, some of them two hundred years old.
The floor Of nave and aisle, in unpretending guise, Was occupied by oaken benches, ranged In seemly rows; the chancel only shewed Some inoffensive marks of earthly state And vain distinction.
A capacious pew Of sculptured oak stood here, with drapery lined; And marble monuments were here displayed Upon the walls; and on the floor beneath Sepulchral stones appeared, with emblems graven, And foot-worn epitaphs.
The Excursion, Book V. We now leave" Grasmere's happy vale," and begin to ascend from the banks of the lake.
When we had reached near the summit of the hill, we looked back, and Thence obtained, Slowly, a less and less obstructed sight Of the flat meadows and indented coast Of the whole lake-- in compass seen!
Far off, And yet conspicuous, stood the old church tower, In majesty presiding over the vale And all her dwellings, seemingly preserved From the intrusion of a restless wind By rocks impassable and mountains huge.
The Excursion, Book Ix.
A place called Rydal Mount, in the vale of Grasmere, is the residence of Mr. Wordsworth, the admired author of" The Excursion," and of other poems, who has happily described in some of his works the peculiar beauties of the neighbouring lake and mountain scenery.
Rydal Water.
After mounting the rugged side of a rocky mountain, we lose sight of the lake of Grasmere; but Rydal Water, another lake still smaller, presents itself to the view.
This lake is about a mile in length, and is spotted with two small islands.
The water is apparently shallow; and this lake is inferior in point of beauty to that of Grasmere.
On one side a few ancient trees decorate its banks; and, on the other, some hoary rocks, with woods vegetating from their fissures, have a picturesque appearance.
The lakes of Grasmere and Rydal empty themselves into the Rothay, which, after a course of two miles, loses its waters in Windermere.
Rydal Hall.
After turning a rocky protuberance on the left, we obtain a view of Rydal Hall, the mansion of Sir Daniel Le Fleming, Bart.
seated on a gentle eminence at the junction of two valleys.
It is a large and ancient building, sheltered by tall oaks many centuries old, and by other trees, with which the surrounding heights are clothed; behind arises the rocky mountain of Rydal Head, which is computed to be upwards of three thousand feet in height.
In front, towards the south, the hall commands a noble view over the vale of Windermere, bounded by the lake.
In a serene evening the charms of this spot are rendered still more delightful by the softened noises of distant waterfalls, which are reverberated by the echoes in great variety.
From Rydal Head, the steep mountain immediately behind Rydal Hall, you have a fine view of the surrounding country.
The pleasant vales of Grasmere and Rydal, beautifully diversified with wood, rock, and water, with verdant pastures and cultivated grounds, are extended at your feet.
Beyond these, the mountains with verdant sides, and purpled with heath, rise in various forms, and discover a small lake called Elter Water.
From this water issues a white silvery stream, which joins the Brathay, and thence flows over a succession of small cascades to mighty Windermere.
Not far distant the majestic lake of Windermere, which gradually unfolds itself during the ascent to the summit of the mountain, now appears in all its grandeur, studded with numerous islands, and nearly intersected by jutting promontories.
Over the western margin of Windermere, Esthwaite Water is seen extending towards Hawkeshead; and on the right of it, Coniston Lake stretches among the high and rocky fells of Furness.
In the horizon is seen the Irish sea, washing a very indented shore.
At another point, mountains extend as far as the eye can reach, declining imperceptibly into distance, and advancing their summits to different heights of elevation; of these the most prominent are Dow Crags, Grisedale Pike, and Helvellyn.
At Rydal Hall are two grand cascades; one in a glen a little above the house, to which a good road has been opened.
This is a considerable stream, which falls in one unbroken sheet from a rock of considerable elevation into a deep basin, rendered interminable to the eye by the dark shade thrown upon it by the moss-covered crags.
The water is said to rush down about twenty - four feet in perpendicular height, and the concussion occasioned by its fall seems to shake the very mountain.
It is a surprising scene.
The other is the celebrated waterfall at Rydal, and is peculiarly beautiful.
The approach to it is through a narrow glen till you come to a little thatched summer-house, which stands on the banks of the river, and which, from the date upon one of its window-shutters, would seem to have been erected in the year 1617.
On entering the room of the summer-house, the view of the cascade bursts at once upon the eye.
The suddenness and velocity of the impressions which the mind receives, defy every attempt to describe the effect produced on the sensations of the spectator.
The momentary effect is electrical.
The noise of the torrent, and the dark shade of the overhanging and surrounding trees, form a scene which inspires a variety of pleasing yet melancholy sensations. "
This cascade," says Mr. Gilpin," though but a miniature, is so beautiful both in itself and its accompaniments, as to deserve a particular notice.
It is seen from a summer-house; before which its rocky cheeks, circling on each side, form a little area, appearing through the window like a picture in a frame.
The water falls within a few yards of the eye, which being rather above its level, has a long perspective view of the stream, as it hurries from the higher grounds, tumbling in various little breaks through its rocky channel, darkened with thicket, till it arrive at the edge of the precipice, before the window, from whence it rushes into the basin, which is formed by nature in the native rock."
It is observable, that two streams fall from the clefts of a small shelf of rock; one of which is a broad riband torrent, fretting itself into a white foam; the other is a small rippling stream, whose current disperses as it falls into the basin.
The dark colour of the moss-clad rock, taking a still deeper tinge from the wood which hangs over it, shows to great advantage the sparkling lustre of the stream, and produces an uncommon effect of light; for the light, which is denied admittance through the trees, is ushered in at the arch of a small wooden bridge above the falls, and reflected from the surface of the water.
This little exhibition affords every effect that is striking in the arrangement of light and shade, and all that is exquisite in the delicacies of contrast.
The first mention of this beautiful little scene was made by the elegant biographer of Mr. Gray, whose account shall be given in his own words. "
Nature," he observes," has here performed every thing in little that she usually executes on a larger scale; and on that account, like a miniature painter, seems to have finished every part of it in a studied manner.
Not a little fragment of rock thrown into the basin, not a single stem of brushwood that starts from its craggy sides, but has a picturesque meaning; and the little central current, dashing down a cleft of the darkest coloured stone, produces an effect of light and shadow beautiful beyond description.
This little theatrical scene might be painted as large as the original, on a canvas not bigger than those usually dropped in the Opera House."
From Rydal we proceed by a delightful way, through coppices and verdant meadows, to Ambleside, which is distant from Keswick sixteen miles.
The following is Mrs. Radcliffe's description of the scenery in the country between Keswick and Ambleside:--" The road from Keswick to Ambleside commences by the ascent of Castle Rigg, the mountain which the Penrith road descends, and which on that side is crowned by a Druid's temple.
The rise is now very laborious, but the views it affords over the vale of Keswick are not dearly purchased by the fatigue.
All Bassenthwaite, its mountains softening away in the perspective, and terminating, on the west, in the sister woods of Withop Brows, extends from the eye; and immediately beneath, the northern end of Derwent Water, with Cawsey Pike, Thornthwaite Fell, the rich upland vale of Newland, peeping from between their bases, and the spiry woods of Foe Park jutting into the lake below.
But the finest prospect is from a gate about half way up the hill, whence you look down upon the head of Derwent Water, with all the Alps of Borrowdale, opening darkly. "
After descending Castle Rigg, and crossing the top of St. John's vale, we seemed as if going into banishment from society, the road then leading over a plain, closely surrounded by mountains, so wild that neither a cottage nor a wood softens their rudeness, and so steep and barren that not even sheep appear upon their sides.
From this plain the road enters Legberthwaite, a narrow valley, running at the back of Borrowdale, green at the bottom, and varied with a few farms; but without wood, and with fells of gray precipices rising to a great height, and nearly perpendicular on either hand, whose fronts are marked only by the torrents that tumble from their utmost summits, and perpetually occur.
We often stopped to listen to their hollow sounds, amidst the solitary greatness of the scene, and to watch their headlong fall down the rocky chasms, their white foam and silver line contrasting with the dark hue of the cliffs. "
As the road descended towards Helvellyn, we looked back through this vast rocky vista to the sweet vale of St. John, lengthening the perspective, and saw, as through a telescope, the broad broken steeps of Saddleback, and the points of Skiddaw, darkly blue, closing it to the north.
The grand rivals of Cumberland were now seen together, and the road soon winding high over the skirts of Helvellyn, brought us to Leathes Water, to which the mountain forms a vast side screen, during its whole length.
This is a long, but narrow and unadorned lake, having little else than walls of rocky fells, starting from its margin.
Continuing on the precipice, at some height from the shore, the road brought us, after three miles, to the poor village of Wythburn, and soon after to the foot of Dunmail Raise, which, though a considerable ascent, forms the dip of two lofty mountains, Steele Fell and Seat Sandal, that rise with finely-sweeping lines on each side, and shut up the vale. "
Beyond Dunmail Raise, one of the grand passes from Cumberland into Westmorland, Helm Crag rears its crest, a strange fantastic summit, round, yet jagged and splintered like the wheel of a water-mill, overlooking Grasmere, which soon after opened below.
A green spreading circle of mountains embosoms this small lake, and, beyond, a wider range rises in amphitheatre, whose rocky tops are rounded and scalloped; yet are great, wild, irregular, and were then overspread with a tint of faint purple.
The softest verdure margins the water, and mingles with corn inclosures and woods, that wave up the hills; but scarcely a cottage any where appears, except at the northern end of the lake, where the village of Grasmere, and its very neat white church, stands among its trees, near the shore, with Helm Crag, and a multitude of fells, rising over it and beyond each other in perspective. "
The lake was as clear as glass, reflecting the headlong mountains, with every feature of every image on its tranquil banks; and one green island varies, but scarcely adorns its surface, bearing only a rude and now shadeless hut.
At a considerable height above the water, the road undulates for a mile, till, near the southern end of Grasmere, it mounts the crags of a fell, and seemed carrying us again into such scenes of ruin and privation as we had quitted with Legberthwaite and Leathes Water.
But, descending the other side of the mountain, we were soon cheered by the view of plantations, enriching the banks of Rydal Water, and by thick woods, mingling among cliffs above the narrow lake, which winds through a close valley for about a mile.
This lake is remarkable for the beauty of its small round islands, luxuriant with elegant trees and shrubs, and whose banks are green to the water's edge.
Rydal Hall stands finely on an eminence, somewhat withdrawn from the east end, in a close romantic nook, among old woods, that feather the fells that rise over their summits, and spread widely along the neighbouring eminences.
This ancient white mansion looks over a rough grassy descent, screened by groves of oak and majestic planes towards the head of Windermere, about two miles distant, a small glimpse of which is caught beyond the wooded steeps of a narrow valley.
In the woods and in the disposition of the ground round Rydal Hall, there is a charming wildness, that suits the character of the general scene; and wherever art appears, it is with graceful plainness and meek subjection to nature. "
The taste by which a cascade in the pleasure grounds, pouring under the arch of a rude rock, amidst the green tint of woods, is shewn through a darkened garden-house, and, therefore, with all the effect which the opposition of light and shade can give, is even not too artificial; so admirably is the intent accomplished of making all the light that is admitted fall upon the objects which are chiefly meant to be observed. "
The road to Ambleside runs through the valley in front of Rydal Hall, and, for some distance, among the woods that belong to it, where again the taste of the owner is conspicuous in the disposition of plantations among pastures of extraordinary richness, and where pure rivulets are suffered to wind, without restraint, over their dark rocky channels.
Woods mantle up the cliffs on either side of this sweet valley; and, higher still, the craggy summits of the fells crowd over the scene.
-- Two miles among its pleasant shades, near the banks of the murmuring Rothay, brought us to Ambleside."
Ambleside.
Ambleside is a small market town, situated in a most beautiful and romantic country, and on the steep declivity of a hill.
It is built in an irregular manner, and has the appearance of a large village.
This town is half encircled by a cove of fells, which rise on the north, and command a delightful view over the upper part of the lake of Windermere.
Of these mountains, Rydal Head is the most conspicuous.
During the summer season Ambleside is a place of favourite resort, on account of its central situation for making excursions to many of the lakes, as well as for its excellent accommodations.
The natural beauties of this district are of a superior order; and a great variety of picturesque and romantic scenery is to be found in the neighbourhood of this town, than can perhaps be met with in any part of this interesting country, within the same compass.
There are two good inns, of which the Salutation is the principal.
Ambleside possesses a neat chapel, erected in the gothic style by public subscription, on the site of an ancient and mean structure, which was pulled down in the year 1812.
This chapel was originally endowed by the inhabitants, who have from time immemorial presented the incumbent; and it was made parochial by Bishop Pearson, in 1675.
In the course of the last century it received various augmentations, which, with the surplice fees, now produce to the clergyman the annual sum of  100.
The interior of this chapel if remarkably neat; and the font, which is of wood, and is placed at one end opposite to the pulpit, is formed in imitation of the urn-shaped stoves so much in use.
Here also is a respectable grammar school, which, when under the superintendence of the late Rev.
Isaac Knipe, was in high estimation.
This school is not noticed by Mr. Carlisle, in his late" Description of the Endowed Grammar Schools in England and Wales."
From the pieces of Roman coin and ancient arms, which have frequently been found in this neighbourhood, Ambleside appears to have been a place of great antiquity.
In a meadow, near the head of Windermere, are the vestiges of a Roman station, which is supposed to have been the Dictis of Antonius's Itinerary, where a part of the cohort of the Numerus Nerviorum Dictentium was stationed.
The dimensions of this fortress are stated by Camden to have been one hundred and thirty - two ells in length, and eighty in breadth.
Its form was an oblong square, and it was situated near the juncture of all the roads from Penrith, Keswick, Ravenglass, Furness, and Kendal, which it commanded.
This station was accessible only on one side.
The walls, however, have so long ceased to exist, that the spot, so fully described by our great antiquary, cannot without difficulty be ascertained.
At the Groves, about a mile from Ambleside, is Stockgill Force, a grand cascade, which, for its singular beauty, may almost be considered as the rival of the far-famed waterfall of Lowdore, near Keswick.
The torrent, which supplies this cascade, rises in the mountains behind Ambleside, and flows in a narrow channel through an opening of rocks, partially concealed by overhanging trees.
The torrent flows in two distinct streams, separated by a rocky yet verdant island, about forty feet wide, covered with moss and shrubs, and foaming with a tremendous noise.
After falling about one hundred and fifty feet, the streams unite, and are dashed from rock to rock, into a dark gulf unfathomable to the eye.
Thence rising in foam, the water flows down a steep and craggy channel, through a narrow gill or valley, luxuriantly adorned with rock and wood; and after forming two or three other pretty cascades, it falls into the Rothay, a little below Ambleside.
This gill is now, as when visited by Mr. Gilpin, so overgrown with wood as to appear almost impervious; but" if a path could be carried through it," agreeably to his suggestion," and the whole a little opened, it might be made very beautiful.
A scene in itself so pleasing, with a noble cascade at one end, and an extensive lake at the other, could not fail to strike the imagination in the most forcible manner."
The deep dark colour of the rocks, in the gloomy bosom of a narrow glen, just visible by day; and the foaming water tinged with a hue of green received from the trees and shrubs, which overhang the fall, render this scene grand and highly awful.
Even if the weather be dry, the waterfall deserves a visit, on account of its singular beauty and distinguished features.
Observations on the Lakes, pp.
141, 142.
A short excursion to one or two cataracts in the neighbourhood of Ambleside, and to Elter Water, is deserving of the tourist's attention.
Crossing the Rotha, over a stone bridge of one arch, you pass through the little hamlet of Clappersgate; where is the principal quay for embarking the slate, charcoal, and other articles, which are navigated down the lake of Windermere.
Here is a stone bridge of two arches over the Brathay, the view of which never fails to attract the notice of the admirers of landscape, and has frequently called into exercise the powers of the artist.
This part of the country derives no inconsiderable advantage in respect of beauty from the form of its buildings and bridges; and the scene at Brathay Bridge abundantly confirms and illustrates this remark.
The long line and flat roofs, so much admired in Italian edifices, are here particularly striking.
Behind the houses rises a lofty hill, the summit of which is often perfectly clear, while its sides are obscured by a thick cloud or mist.
This effect, though sufficiently common among mountains, appears singular to those who have been accustomed only to a level country.
After crossing the bridge over the Brathay, is a fine alpine ride to Skelwith Bridge, which stands on the same river, and is nearly three miles distant from Ambleside.
Here is the division of Westmorland and Lancashire.
About a quarter of a mile above the bridge is Skelwith Force, which is a pleasing waterfall.
The river tumbles down its rocky channel between two crags, and in the distance behind it are seen the rugged mountains called Langdale Pikes.
Further to the left is a fine view of Elter Water, a small lake, well wooded, and amply stored with fish.
At its head stands Elter Hall, embosomed in trees, above which Langdale Pikes rear their summits with majestic grandeur.
Proceeding about half a mile further over a steep road, you descend by a precipitous winding path to Colwith Bridge.
Here you again enter Westmorland.
This bridge is a rude structure of one arch, over the little River Colwith, which takes its rise in the fells above, and rushes down the rocks with an impetuous roar.
Adown the vale, Broken by stones, and over a stony bed, Rolled the loud mountain-stream.
Southey's Madoc.
The river is audible long before you reach the waterfall.
The total depth of the cataract, which is known by the name of Culleth or Colwith Force, does not perhaps exceed one hundred and fifty feet.
The torrent falls down a rocky ledge into a shallow basin, from the extremity of which a small fragment of rock projects, and causes a temporary division of the stream.
After falling into another basin, it flows down another rocky ledge for a few feet, and is then separated into two rapid currents by a mass of rock that projects in the centre.
Thence it tumbles into a basin below, and on reaching the rocky bottom, pours its noisy waters along a craggy channel, between a tremendous fissure, the sides of which are clothed with bushes, shrubs, dwarf trees, and underwood, that sometimes almost conceal the water from the sight.
Upon the brow of a hill, just before reaching the guide-post to Kendal, is a fine view of the foot of Elter Water and its outlet, which meanders along a narrow vale.
About a quarter of a mile from this spot, you ascend the road on the left leading to Skelwith Fall, the most elevated part of the hamlet of that name.
From this place is a charming view of the hamlet itself, with its bridge, and the waterfall above it; and beyond, are seen Elter Water and Hall, the prospect being bounded by Lingmer Fell, a long range.
Though Skelwith Force is confessedly inferior to Colwith Force, yet it was well worthy of being seen by those who have not time or courage to ascend the alpine roads which lead to the latter waterfall.
Windermere.
Windermere, or, as it is sometimes called, Winandermere, is the most capacious and extensive of all the English lakes.
In a straight line down the middle of the lake, it is ten miles and a half in length; and along the road by Troutbeck Bridge and Bowness to Fell Foot, it is thirteen miles and a half long.
The author of" A Fortnight's Ramble" says, that by a circumferenter wheeled round Windermere from Hawkeshead, by Newby Bridge, Bowness, and Ambleside, the distance was ascertained to be twenty - six miles and five furlongs; and that as it was necessary occasionally to recede considerably from the lake, the real circumference of Windermere, as a sheet of water, must be less than twenty - three miles.
Mr. Clarke, in his survey of this lake, observes, that it contains, below the ferry, two thousand acres, at low water; and, above it, two thousand five hundred and seventy - four acres, including the islands; for which if we deduct forty acres, there remains a sheet of water, comprising four thousand five hundred and thirty - four acres.
The breadth of this lake rarely exceeds two miles; near the head it is considerably more than a mile; between this and the islands, which lie nearly in its centre, it is rarely less than a mile; but from the islands, it becomes gradually narrower to Newby Bridge, which lies at its southern extremity.
This inequality of width is occasioned partly by the numerous bays with which the shores of this lake are indented, especially on the east or Westmorland side; and partly by the bold crags, which, in some parts of the western or Lancashire side, extend their bases into the water.
The depth varies from thirty to one hundred and twenty feet.
The principal feeders of this lake are the rivers Rothay and Brathay; the former of which, as has been already observed, rises in the mountains near Wythburn, and forms the two lakes of Grasmere and Rydal before it enters Windermere.
The Brathay rises in Langdale Pikes, a range of rocky mountains, and, after flowing for a considerable distance over a craggy channel, it unites its waters with those of the Rothay, and, after a short course, enters the lake.
The Troutbeck also contributes to its supply, and falls into Windermere, near Calgarth.
The waters of the lake are discharged at Newby Bridge, where they receive the name of the River Leven, which, after a course of two miles, falls into the estuary, called Leven Sands.
The extraordinary clearness of this lake attracts the attention of the tourist; it is truly, as Mr. Gilpin has expressed it," all over nitidis argenteus undis.
The eye can see distinctly, in smooth water, through a medium of at least a dozen yards, and view the inhabitants of its deep recesses as they play in shoals, and -- sporting with quick glance, Show to the sun their waved coats, dropped with gold."
Diffusiveness, stately beauty, and, at the upper end, magnificence, have been justly considered as the characteristics of Windermere.
Another peculiarity which this lake possesses may also be added.
It suffers little change in appearance from the seasons, but preserves the dignity of its character under all circumstances, being seldom depressed below, and as seldom raised above, its ordinary level.
Even in the most violent rains, when the country is drenched with water-- when every rill is swollen into a river, and the mountains pour down floods through new channels-- the lake is said to maintain the same equal temper: and though it may spread a few yards over its lower shores( which is the utmost it does), yet it seldom increases so much as to become and object of observation; nor does the severity of the greatest drought occasion any material alteration in its bounds.
Once, indeed, it is recorded to have risen seven feet in perpendicular height, in which case its limits would certainly appear enlarged; but, as Mr. Gilpin conjectures, this uncommon rise was probably occasioned by the bursting of a water-spout.
But, though it is not perceptibly elevated by rains, this lake is often greatly agitated by winds.
Of all the English lakes, none is so exposed to sudden squalls as Windermere, through its entire length; nor does any piece of fresh water in the whole island, perhaps, so much emulate the grandeur of a disturbed ocean.
Hence it is navigated with great caution, whenever there is a tendency to stormy weather.
The extensive waters of this lake are plentifully stored with trout, perch, pike, and especially with char.
Of the last, fishermen distinguish two varieties-- the case char and the gelt char; the gelt char is a fish which has not spawned the preceding season, and on that account is esteemed more delicate.
The char in this lake is nearly twice as large as the herring; in form it resembles the trout, but is of a more delicate flavour.
The banks of Windermere are also the favourite haunts of wild fowls, which add to the scenery of the lake, by the variety of forms in which they appear, sometimes, sitting in black groups on the water, they rise and sink with the waves; at other times in the air, they circle the lake in figured files, or with hesitating wing seize some station on its banks or surface.
At Water Head, a place so called from its being the head of Windermere, is a fine open view of this part of the lake.
On the banks of this Queen of the Lakes, as Windermere has been called, are many elegant villas: at Brathay, Mr. Law's; at Clappersgate, Miss Prichard's; Cottage, Mrs. Taylor's; Calgarth, the late Bishop Watson's; Belfield, Mrs. Taylor's; at Storrs, John Bolton, Esq.
; at Townhead, Mr. Taylor's; at Fell Foot, Mr. Dixon's; at Newby Bridge, Mr. Machel's,&amp; c. These objects add to the natural beauties of the surrounding scenery.
Low Wood Inn.
After visiting Water Head, the road continues almost on a level with the lake, which now recedes a little, till you come to Low Wood Inn, which is situated about two miles from Ambleside.
This inn commands a prospect of the whole upper part of the lake, upon whose margin it stands, together with a view as far down towards the south as Mr. Curwen's Island, including several of the islets with which the latter is encircled.
Here a scene opens to the eye, which, in order to be fully enjoyed, must be beheld.
The lake spreads out into an immense plain of shining water, curiously indented along the opposite shore, where the hills, gradually sloping, display a mixture of woodlands and beautiful farms.
Some of the hills which circumscribe the head of Windermere are clothed with wood; whilst others are of a dark slaty colour, and extend their bases into the lake, which they apparently contract to a river.
Indeed, the vicinity of Low Wood presents numerous charming views of the lake and the surrounding country; but of the beauties of this situation, a true idea can be formed only by him who has time to explore the various elevations, who considers the various points of view, and who suffers no accidental circumstance to escape his observation.
Ascend a gentle eminence in a lane leading to the village of Troutbeck, and you have a view of the prominent beauties of the surrounding landscape.
The stupendous chaos of rocks which terminate the northern shore, appear no other than the Pyrenean Chain; and a very moderate exertion of the fancy would transport you to the classic borders of the Leman Lake.
In front, the rocks of Hardknot, Wrynose, Rainsbarrow,&amp; c. rise in a magnificent cluster, towering one above another in awful grandeur, and harmonizing all the infinite variety of shade; while the broken intervals of distance are filled by the silver pikes of Langdale, undulating fancifully along the verge of the horizon.
From these slope the tame fells of Coniston, degenerating southward into low and naked downs, shelving to the shore, enlivened here and there by inclosures of pasture and corn lands.
Some handsome knolls, pointed with wood, variegate the ornaments of the eastern beach.
The mediocrity of the southern boundary, however conspicuous, may escape the severity of criticism if, unfortunately, it were not exposed by the splendour of connexion.
In scenes like these, where Nature, working in the style of a bold and independent master, launches into the wild and fanciful, and soars beyond the conception of the human genius, we are unable to relish such an association.
A Descriptive Tour to the Lakes, in 1804.
Near Low Wood Inn is a commodious pier, for embarking on a voyage down the lake.
At this place a cannon is kept, for the purpose of gratifying visitors with those surprising reverberations of sound, which follow its discharge in these romantic vales.
Bowness.
After quitting Low Wood Inn, you leave the margin of the water, and pass through groves and secluded farms, scarcely obtaining a glimpse of the lake till you arrive opposite to Calgarth, where it again opens to the view, at the distance of about half a mile.
The sweet intervening vale, finely cultivated, and adorned with the mansion in which the late venerable Bishop of Landaff resided, has a beautiful appearance.
About half a mile further is a gentle eminence, from which is a prospect of the principal part of the lake, with all its islands.
The surrounding mountains, though high, are greatly inferior to those on the confines of the lakes which we have already visited, and slope to the water in an irregular manner, leaving on this side an uneven border of low ground.
This situation is on the side of a ridge which is cultivated or wooded to the summit, and the base of which is adorned with seats, villages, and small farms.
On the opposite side the rocky range of hills descends rapidly to the water, and is studded with bulging rocks, and with trees scattered over the surface, or collected in woods upon the brow of the mountain.
The mountains at that end of the lake which we have left rise grandly in lofty heights, and overlook the lesser hills with sullen pride.
On the left are low points of land from each shore, which project far into the lake, and contract it to the size of a noble winding river; but after emerging from the islands, the lake again expands, and becomes majestic.
Immediately in front is a spacious bay, which is more than a mile in breadth, and sweeps away to the right, alternately contracting and dilating its indented shores, till it reaches the bases of that noble amphitheatre of mountains already mentioned.
At the distance of a mile from Bowness is Rayrigg, a little village, commanding a view of the whole lower reach of Windermere.
Rayrigg Hall, which is the seat of the Rev.
J. Fleming, rector of Bootle, stands on the margin of the lake, and is said to bear a considerable resemblance to Ferney, the once celebrated residence of Voltaire, on the lake of Geneva.
Bowness; anciently called Bulness, has been not inaptly termed by Mr. Gilpin," the capital port-town of the lakes, if we may adopt a dignified style, which the grandeur of the scene suggests.
It is the great mart for fish and charcoal, both which commodities are largely imported here, and carried by land into the country.
Its harbour is crowded with vessels of various kinds, some of which are used merely as pleasure boats in navigating the lake."
The church at Bowness is a neat and venerable edifice.
Its interior bears a striking resemblance to the exquisite picture of a church among the mountains, drawn by Mr. Wordsworth.
The portals of the sacred pile Stood open, and we entered.
On my frame, At such transition from the fervid air, A grateful coolness fell, that seemed to strike The heart, in concert with that temperate awe, And natural reverence, which the place inspired.
Not framed to nice proportions was the pile, But large and massy; for duration built, With pillars crowded, and the roof upheld By naked rafters intricately crossed, Like leafless underboughs, in some thick grove, All withered by the depth of shade above.
Admonitory texts inscribed the walls, Each in its ornamental scroll inclosed.
The Excursion, Book V. This church contains some monumental inscriptions of the neighbouring families, especially of the Philipsons, the ancient proprietors of Calgarth; but it is now interesting chiefly on account of its painted chancel-window, which originally belonged to Furness Abbey, and which, after the dissolution of the monasteries, was purchased by the parishioners of Windermere, and placed in their church.
The window consists of seven compartments.
In the third, fourth, and fifth, is depicted the crucifixion, with the Virgin Mary on the right, an St. John the Evangelist on the left side of the cross; these are the most central and perfect figures; angels are receiving the blood from the five wounds.
Below the cross is a group of monks in their proper habits, with the abbot in a vestment; their names are written on scrolls issuing from their mouths; but the abbot's name is defaced, which would have given a date to the whole.
In the second compartment are the figures of St. George and the dragon.
In the sixth is represented St. Catherine, with the emblems of her martyrdom, the sword and the wheel.
In the seventh are two mitred abbots, and beneath them two monks dressed in vestments.
In the middle compartment above, are finely painted, quarterly, the arms of England and France, encircled with the garter and motto, and supposed to have been executed in the reign of Edward Iii.
The rest of the window is filled up by pieces of tracery, containing the armorial bearings of the Flemings, Urswicks, Prestons, and other ancient families.
However, some of the figures are at present not very discernible, and others have become mutilated, from the gradual decay of the leaden frames in which they have been originally set.
In the window on the north side of the church, is a piece of painted glass, containing the Carriers' Arms, which are a rope, a wantey-hook, and five packing skewers, being the implements used by carriers for fastening their sheets together.
Tradition says, that these arms were put up in memory of a person who had realized a fortune by that employment, and who contributed the lead with which this church was covered on first erection.
The rectory house stands in a pleasant situation, and fronts the lake, upon whose shore the glebe-land extends nearly half a mile in length.
From an eminence above Bowness, the lake and all its accompaniments appear in all their grandeur.
It ought to be a morning view; and it has been described by Mr. Young, in all the glowing colours which language can bestow. "
Having viewed," he says," the most pleasing objects from these points, let me next conduct you to a spot, where, at one glance, you command them all in fresh situations, and all assuming a new appearance.
For this purpose, you return to Bowness, and, taking the by-road to the turnpike, mount the hill without turning your head,( if I was your guide, I would conduct you behind a small hill, that you might come at once upon the view), till you almost gain the top, when you will be struck with astonishment at the prospect spread at your feet, which, if not the most superlative view that nature can exhibit, she is more fertile in beauties than the reach of my imagination will allow me to conceive.
It would be mere vanity to attempt to describe a scene which beggars all description; but that you may have some faint idea of the outlines of this wonderful picture, I will give you the particulars of which it consists. "
The point on which you stand is the side of a large ridge of hills that form the eastern boundary of the lake, and the situation is high enough to look down upon all the objects;-- a circumstance of great importance, which painting cannot imitate.
In landscapes you are either on a level with the objects, or look up to them; the painter cannot give the declivity at your feet, which lessens the object as much in the perpendicular line, as in the horizontal one.
You look down upon a noble winding valley, of about twelve miles long, every where inclosed with grounds, which rise in a very bold and various manner; in some places bulging into mountains abrupt, wild, and uncultivated; in others breaking into rocks, craggy, pointed, and irregular; here rising into hills covered with the noblest woods, presenting a gloomy brownness of shade, almost from the clouds to the reflection of the trees in the limpid water of the lake they so beautifully skirt; there waving in glorious slopes of cultivated inclosures, adorned in the sweetest manner with every object that can give variety to art, or elegance to nature; trees, woods, villages, farms, scattered with picturesque confusion, and waving to the eye in the most romantic landscapes that nature can exhibit. "
This valley, so beautifully inclosed, is floated by the lake, which spreads forth to the right and left in one vast, but irregular expanse of transparent water; a more noble object can hardly be imagined.
Its immediate shore is traced in every variety of line that fancy can imagine; sometimes contracting the lake into the appearance of a noble winding river; at others retiring from it, and opening into large bays, as if for navies to anchor in; promontories spread with woods, or scattered with trees and inclosures, projecting into the water in the most picturesque style imaginable; rocky points breaking the shore, and rearing their bold heads above the water; in a word, a variety that amazes the beholder. "
But what finishes the scene with an elegance too delicious to be imagined, is, this beautiful sheet of water being dotted with no less than ten islands, distinctly comprehended by the eye; all of the most bewitching beauty.
The large one presenting a various waving line, which rises from the water in the most picturesque inequalities of surface; high land in one place, low in another; clumps of trees in this spot, scattered ones in that, adorned by the farm-house on the water's edge, and backed with a little wood, vying in simple elegance with Boromean palaces; some of the smaller inlets rising from the lake, like little hills of wood; some only scattered with trees, and others of grass of the finest verdure; a more beautiful variety is nowhere to be seen."
Curwen's Island.
From Bowness navigate to Curwen's Island, so denominated from John Christian Curwen, Esq., to whose correct taste it owes many of its decorations.
Cultured slopes, Wild tracts of forest-ground, and scattered groves, And mountains bare-- or clothed with ancient woods, Surrounded us; and as we held our way Along the level of the glassy flood, They ceased not to surround us; change of place, From kindred features diversely combined, Producing change of beauty ever new.
-- Ah!
that such beauty varying in the light Of living Nature, cannot be portrayed By words, nor by the pencil's silent skill; But is the property of him alone Who hath beheld it, noted it with care, And, in his mind, recorded it with love!
The Excursion, Book Ix.
Curwen's Island, or, as it was formerly called, Windermere Island, is the largest in the lake, and is about a mile and three quarters in circumference, containing about thirty acres.
It is of an oblong form, and its shores are irregular, occasionally retiring into bays, or broken into creeks.
It was purchased between thirty and forty years ago, by Mrs.( then Miss) Curwen, of the creditors of Mr. English, whose buildings and mode of laying out the ground were perhaps too severely animadverted upon by different writers.
However, could the late accomplished and benevolent Gilpin now behold this lovely abode, he would have the gratification of seeing the general outline, which he sketched with so much ability for its improvement, filled up in the most agreeable manner.
The plantations, consisting of Weymouth pines, ash, and other trees, are so judiciously disposed as to afford a complete shelter to the house, without intercepting the view.
The house, which Mr. English had erected, was finished by Mr. Curwen, and is so planned as to command a prospect of the whole lake.
The grounds are laid out in a style of equal elegance and beauty.
The island is surrounded by a gravel walk, which strangers are permitted to use.
In the middle part of the island are a few clumps of trees; and a neat boat-house has been erected contiguous to the place of landing.
This charming spot is at present the residence of Mr. Curwen, junior.
Particularly by Mr. West, and Mr. Hutchinson.
From this fine island, which no tourist ever visited without rapture, or left without regret, every object that gratified the eye from the shore appears in a new and even a more beautiful point of view. "
A more sequestered spot," says Mr. Gilpin," cannot easily be conceived.
Nothing can be more excluded from the noise and interruption of life; or abound with a greater variety of those circumstances which make retirement pleasing. "
The whole island contains about thirty acres.
Its form is oblong; its shores irregular, retiring into bays, and broken into creeks.
The surface too is uneven; and a sort of little apennine ridge runs through the middle of it, falling down in all shapes into the water.
Like its great mother island, the southern part wears a smoother aspect than the northern, which is broken and rocky. "
Formerly the whole island was one entire grove.
At present it is rather bare of wood, though there are some large oaks upon it.
One of its greatest beauties arises from that irregular little apennine just mentioned, which extends from one end to the other.
This circumstance hides its insularity, by connecting it with the continent.
In every part, except on the high grounds, you stand in an amphitheatre composed of the noblest objects; and the lake performing the office of a sunk fence, the grandeur of each part of the continent is called in, by turns, to aid the insignificance of the island. "
The oblong form also of the lake gives the island another great advantage.
On both its sides the opposite shores of the continent are little more than half a mile distant; but at the northern end and southern points there is a large sheet of water.
The views, therefore, as you walk round, are continually changing through all the varieties of distance; which are still farther improved by a little degree of obliquity in the position of the island. "
The island," observes the same writer," formerly belonged to the Philipsons, a family of note in Westmorland.
During the civil wars, two of them, an elder and a younger brother, served the king.
The former, who was the proprietor of it, commanded a regiment; the latter was a major. "
The major, whose name was Robert, was a man of great spirit and enterprise; and for his many feats of personal valour, had obtained among the Oliverians of those parts the appellation of Robin the Devil. "
After the war had subsided, and the direful effects of public opposition had ceased, revenge and private malice long kept alive the animosity of individuals.
Colonel Briggs, a steady friend to the usurpation, resided at this time at Kendal; and, under the double character of leading magistrate,( for he was a justice of the peace) and an active commander, held the country in awe.
This person having heard that major Philipson was at his brother's house, on the island in Windermere, resolved, if possible, to punish a man who had made himself so particularly obnoxious.
With this view, he mustered a party which he thought sufficient, and went himself on the enterprise.
How it was conducted my authority does not inform us-- whether he got together the navigation of the lake, and blockaded the place by sea, or whether he landed, and carried on his approached in form.
Neither do we learn the strength of the garrison within, nor of the works without, though every gentleman's house was at that time in some degree a fortress.
All we learn is that Major Philipson endured a siege of eight or ten days, with great gallantry, till his brother, the colonel, hearing of his distress, raised a party, and relieved him.
Dr.
Burn's History of Westmorland. "
It was now the major's turn to make reprisals.
He put himself at the head of a little troop of horse, and rode to Kendal.
Here being informed that Colonel Briggs was at prayers( for it was on a Sunday morning), he stationed his men properly in the avenues, and himself, armed, rode directly into the church.
It probably was not a regular church, but some large place of meeting.
It is said he intended to seize the colonel, and carry him off; but as this seems to have been totally impracticable, it is rather probable that his intention was to kill him on the spot; and in the midst of the confusion, to escape.
Whatever his intention was, it was frustrated, for Briggs happened to be elsewhere. "
The congregation, as might be expected, was thrown into great confusion on seeing an armed man, on horseback, make his appearance among them; and the major taking advantage of their astonishment, turned his horse round, and rode quietly out.
But having given an alarm, he was presently assaulted as he left the assembly; and, being seized, his girths were cut, and he was unhorsed. "
At this instant his party made a furious attack on the assailants; and the major killed, with his own hand, the man who had seized him, clapped the saddle, ungirthed as it was, upon the horse, and vaulting into it, rode full speed through the streets of Kendal, calling his men to follow him, and with his whole party made a safe retreat to his asylum in the lake.
-- The action marked the man.
Many knew him; and they who did not, knew as well from the exploit, that it could be nobody but Robin the Devil."
This achievement has furnished Mr. Walter Scott with materials for portraying in his Poem, called Rokeby, a similar attempt, which, however, terminated in a different manner:-- -- Through the gothic arch there sprung A horseman armed, at headlong speed-- Sable his cloke, his plume, his steed.
Fire from the flinty floor was spurned, The vaults unwonted clang returned!-- One instant's glance around he threw, From saddle-bow his pistol drew: Grimly determined was his look!
His charger with the spurs he strook-- All scattered backward as he came, For all he knew Bertram Risingham!
Three bounds that noble courser gave; The first has reached the central nave, The second cleared the chancel wide, The third,-- he was at Wycliffe's side.
Full levelled at the baron's head, Rung the report-- the bullet sped-- And to his long account, and last, Without a groan dark Oswald past!
All was so quick, that it might seem A flash of lightning, or a dream.
Xxxiii.
While yet the smoke the deed conceals, Bertram his ready charger wheels; But floundered on the pavement floor The steed, and down the rider bore, And, bursting in the headlong sway, The faithless saddle-girths gave way. '
Twas while he toiled him to be freed, And with the rein to raise the steed, That from amazement's iron trance All Wycliffe's soldiers waked at once.
Sword, halbert, musquet-butt, their blows Hailed upon Bertram as he rose; A score of pikes, with each a wound, Bore down and pinned him to the ground; But still his struggling force he rears,' Gainst hacking brands and stabbing spears; Thrice from assailants shook him free, Once gained his feet, and twice his knee.
By tenfold odds oppressed at length, Despite his struggles and his strength, He took an hundred mortal wounds, As mute as fox' mongst mangling hounds; And when he died, his parting groan Had more of laughter than of moan!
Rokeby, Canto vi.
After minutely surveying the various interesting objects, which this island affords a convenient station for beholding, proceed across the water.
Right across the lake Our pinnace moves: then coasting creek and bay, Glades we behold-- and into thickets peep Where couch the spotted deer; or raised our eyes To shaggy steeps on which the careless goat Browzed by the side of dashing waterfalls.
Thus did the bark, meandering with the shore, Pursue her voyage.
The Excursion, Book ix. "
In crossing the water, at the ferry," says Mrs. Radcliffe," the illusions of vision give force to the northern mountains, which, viewed from hence, seem to ascend from its margin and spread round it in a magnificent amphitheatre.
This was to us the most interesting view on Windermere.
On our approaching the western shore, the range of rocks that form it, discovered their cliffs, and gradually assumed a consequence which the breadth of the channel had denied them; and their darkness was well opposed by the bright verdure and variegated autumnal tints of the isles at their bases."
Near the isthmus of the ferry-point is a building called the Station, which is one of the most delightful places near the lake.
In front, Rampsholme, or Berkshire Island, presents its whole length, clothed with wood.
An extent of water, twelve miles in circumference, spreads itself to the north, and is frequently intersected with promontories, or spotted with islands.
The eastern view is adorned with all that is beautiful, grand, and sublime.
To the south, Rawlinson's Nab, a high promontory, juts far into the lake; and over it, Windermere extends in a magnificent sheet of water, and following the winding shore to the south, seems lost behind a projecting rock on the eastern side.
Return to the road, and proceed to the farmhouse called Harrow.
Here the beauties of the lake and its accompaniments are fully seen.
Curwen's Island appears still more pleasing, with its indented shores, and is proudly triumphant over a variety of wooded islets in its vicinage.
From Rawlinson's Nab, a peninsular rock of circular appearance, you see the lake bending in different directions, in two fine sheets of water.
The southern stretch is circumscribed by wooded hills, interspersed with rocks and inclosures, and forming a beautiful variety of shore.
The northern view is pleasantly broken by promontories and small islands; the cultivated slopes intermingled with waving woods on one side, form a fine contrast with the wild and abrupt ridge of hills on the other; and the whole is terminated by a back-ground of distant high mountains.
Esthwaite Water.
We now leave the vale and lake of Windermere, and proceed towards Hawkshead, which is about four miles distant.
This road extends along the borders of Esthwaite Water to Hawkshead.
Another road leads from Ambleside by the head of Windermere, a distance of five miles.
Esthwaite Water is about two miles in length and half a mile in breadth, and intersected by a peninsula, which projects into the water from each of the shores.
These peninsulas are fringed with trees and coppice-wood, and cultivated at the summits.
Around the margin of the lake rise gentle hills, green at their tops," with plantations and pastures alternately spreading along the easy shores, and white farms scattered sparingly upon the slopes above.
The water seems to glide through the quiet privacy of pleasure-grounds; so fine is the turf on its banks, so elegant its copses, and such an air of peace and retirement prevails over it."
This charming sheet of water is surrounded by a good carriage-road; and over the outlet, by which it discharges itself, is a narrow stone bridge.
Near the head of the lake is an islet containing not more than two perches of land.
This islet is said to have been separated from the ground on the banks of the lake, and to have formerly floated about according to the directions in which the winds blew; but it has now continued stationary for some years, and is at present covered with shrubs.
The fish in this water are perch, pike, eel, and trout.
No char is found in it, though it is connected with Windermere, in which that species of fish so much abounds; perhaps this may be occasioned by the shallowness of Esthwaite Water, as it has been observed that char is met with only in deep lakes.
Upon a gentle elevation stands Belmont, the seat of the Rev.
Reginald Braithwaite.
It is a neat modern-built house, surrounded with plantations and grounds tastefully laid out, and commanding a pleasing view of the lake and its environs.
Few mansions are so charmingly situated.
Hawkshead.
Hawkshead is a small but ancient town, situated at the foot of a mountain, near the extremity of the beautiful vale in which reposes the lake of Esthwaite; and behind the mountainous ridge under which the town stands, rise the steep fells of Coniston.
The church is situated upon an eminence, which commands an extensive prospect over the lake and the whole valley.
Hawkshead has a good market-place, and a neat town-house, erected a few years ago, chiefly by the subscriptions of London merchants, who had received their education here.
The school, which is held in high and deserved estimation, was founded by Archbishop Sandys, who was a native of Hawkshead.
At this school were educated Dr. Wordsworth, author of" Ecclesiastical Biography,"&amp; c. and, as we believe, his brother, William Wordsworth, Esq.
Near Hawkshead are the remains of the house in which the abbot of Furness kept residence by monks, who performed divine service and other parochial duties in the neighbourhood; and over the gateway is a room, in which the bailiff of Hawkshead held courts, and distributed justice, in the name of the abbot.
Coniston Water.
After leaving Hawkshead, we traverse an alpine road, and obtain another view of Windermere and of the mountains in the neighbourhood of Ambleside.
As we advance, Coniston Fells seem to multiply, and become still more terrific; but at length the road descends, and we obtain a sight of Coniston Water.
Coniston Mere, or Thurston Lake, as it is sometimes called, is about six miles in length from north to south, and three quarters of a mile at its greatest breadth from east to west.
Its depth is various, and is reckoned to be about forty fathoms in the deepest part.
Its shores are beautifully indented, and several small bays appear in succession.
Both sides of the lake are marked with coppices, interspersed with verdant meadows, and with patches of rocky common; above which, the mountains, clothed with verdure and fragments of rock, gradually elevate themselves.
A pleasant road winds along the side of the lake, sometimes through thick groves and coppices, which scarcely admit a sight of the water; at other times over naked tracts, commanding a full prospect of the lake.
Under a mountain, on the west side of the water, stands the village of Coniston, pleasantly situated; and above it is the handsome seat of Mr. Knott, denominated Water Head from its vicinity to the lake.
Coniston Hall, near the western edge of the water, is an ancient mansion, which exhibits a venerable appearance, and is said to have belonged only to two families since the time of William the Conqueror.
Above the verdant banks, which are sparingly studded with villages, seats, and cottages, the dark and rocky steeps ascend to an alpine height, and encircle the head of the lake.
Here are several slate works, and also a copper-mine, which has been abandoned.
On the margin of a small circular bay, near to the place where the road first joins the level of the water, is a beautiful prospect: here appears the greatest extent of the lake, over which arise the dark fells of Coniston, bleak, craggy, and barren; and behind them tower the blue mountains of Westmorland, extending their summits to the clouds.
The road continues along the verge of the mountain, alternately passing through beautiful groves and over patches of common, and sometimes exhibiting a furze bush or a solitary yew tree.
During this part of the route, the lake is sometimes concealed from sight, and at other times appears in full view.
From a prominent woody rock, which extends far into the water, is a commanding prospect of each side of the lake.
Towards its lower part, two peninsulas form a fine bay; and considerably beyond them is the termination of the lake, where two points of land recede, and leave just room enough for the water to escape.
Here is the high mountain called the Old Man, which is said to be two thousand five hundred and seventy feet above the level of the sea.
Upon the summit of this mountain are three heaps of stones, called the Old Man, his Wife, and Son, where there has once been a beacon.
The top of it is covered with the deepest moss, and extends about half a mile in length and a quarter in breadth.
From the summit the view is very extensive, stretching on the west to the sea beyond Lancaster, and northward, on very serene days, as far as Scotland and the Isle of Man.
At the lower end of the water are several good stations for obtaining general views of the lake, particularly one from a rock on the right of the road, a little above the village of Nibthwaite.
At this village the lake becomes narrow, and gradually decreases till it terminates at Lowick Bridge in the rivulet called Crake, which flows from thence to the sands at Ulverston.
This village is pleasantly situated; and at Low Nibthwaite is an iron forge.
Mrs. Radcliffe viewed this water by the same route which has been described, and has thus noticed its beauties:--" This lake appeared to us one of the most charming we had seen.
From the sublime mountains which bend round its head, the heights, on either side, decline towards the south into waving hills, that form its shores, and often stretch in long sweeping points into the water, generally covered with tufted wood, but sometimes with the tender verdure of pasturage.
The tops of these woods were just embrowned with autumn, and contrasted well with other slopes, rough and heathy, that rose above, or fell beside them to the water's brink, and added force to the colouring, which the reddish tints of decaying fern, the purple bloom of heath, and the bright golden gleams of broom, spread over these elegant banks.
Their hues, the graceful undulations of the marginal hills and bays, the richness of the woods, the solemnity of the northern fells, and the deep repose that pervades the scene, where only now and then a white cottage or a farm lurks among the trees, are circumstances which render Thurston Lake one of the most interesting, and, perhaps, the most beautiful of any in the country."
The feeders of this lake are Black Beck and Coniston Beck.
The char in it are highly esteemed for their flavour, and are said to be the finest in England.
They are not taken so early in the year as those in Windermere, but continue proportionately longer in the spring.
This lake belongs chiefly to Lady Le Fleming.
Ulverston.
Proceed to Ulverston, either by Penny Bridge or Lowick Bridge, along a good road.
It is a pleasant country to Penny Bridge, immediately beyond which are high grounds on the right, and on the left an estuary, which, during the time of high water, forms a beautiful bay.
At Penny Bridge are some neat houses; and to this place small vessels navigate.
By way of Lowick the country is also pleasing, and the prospects are varied.
On the right is the old mansion of Lowick Hall, once the seat of a family of that name; and behind it are gray rocky mountains, striped with heath, and exhibiting barrenness.
Upon the bridge at Lowick is a beautiful view of Coniston Lake, and of its accompaniments.
Ulverston is a neat well-built town, situated at the foot of a declivity of hills.
It is the capital of Furness.
The streets are regular and spacious.
Its principal trade consists in iron ore and blue slater, obtained in the neighbourhood; of which vast quantities are sent coastwise to different parts of the kingdom.
The principal iron mines are three miles west from Ulverston, at a place called Whitrigs.
The weekly market for Low Furness has been long established at Ulverston, to the prejudice of Dalton, which was the ancient capital of this part.
Furness Abbey.
Next proceed to visit the venerable ruins of Furness Abbey, which is situated about a mile and a half beyond Dalton.
We soon leave that hilly and wild district in which our route has led us, and enter the fertile plains of Low Furness, surrounded by mountains on the one side, and by the sea on the other.
Of this celebrated abbey, Mrs. Radcliffe has given the following minute and interesting description: " About a mile and a half on this side of the abbey, the road passes through Dalton, a very ancient little town, once the capital of Low Furness, and rendered so important by its neighbourhood to the abbey, that Ulverston, the present capital, could not then support the weekly market for which it had obtained a charter.
Dalton, however, sunk with the suppression of its neighbouring patrons, and is now chiefly distinguished by the pleasantness of its situation; to which a church, built on a bold ascent, and the remains of a castle advantageously placed for the command of the adjoining valley, still attach some degree of dignity.
What now exists of the latter is one tower, in a chamber of which the abbot of Furness held his secular court; and the chamber was afterwards used as a gaol for debtors, till within a few years, when the dead ruin released the living one.
The present church-yard, and the site of this castle, are supposed to have been included within the limits of a castellum built by Agricola, of the fosse of which there are still some faint vestiges. "
Beneath the brow on which the church and tower stand, a brook flows through a narrow valley, that winds about a mile and a half to the abbey.
In the way thither we passed the entrance of one of the very rich iron mines with which the neighbourhood abounds; and the deep red tint of the soil, that overspreads almost the whole country between Ulverston and the monastery, sufficiently indicates the nature of the treasures beneath. "
In a close glen, branching from this valley, shrouded by winding banks clumped with old groves of oak and chestnut, we found the magnificent remains of Furness Abbey.
The deep retirement of its situation, the venerable grandeur of its Gothic arches, and the luxuriant yet ancient trees, that shadow this forsaken spot, are circumstances of picturesque, and, if the expression may be allowed, of sentimental beauty, which fill the mind with solemn yet delightful emotion.
This glen is called the Vale of Nightshade, or, more literally from its ancient title Bekangsgill," the Glen of deadly Nightshade," that plant being abundantly found in the neighbourhood.
Its romantic gloom, and sequestered privacy, particularly adapted it to the austerities of monastic life; and, in the most retired part of it, King Stephen, while earl of Mortaign and Bulloign, founded, in the year 1127, the magnificent monastery of Furness, and endowed it with princely wealth, and almost princely authority, in which it was second only to Fountains Abbey, in Yorkshire. "
The windings of the glen conceal these venerable ruins, till they are closely approached-- and the by-road that conducted us is margined with a few ancient oaks, which stretch their broad branches entirely across it, and are fine preparatory objects to the scene beyond.
A sudden bend in this road brought us within view of the northern gate of the abbey, a beautiful Gothic arch, one side of which is luxuriantly festooned with nightshade.
A thick grove of plane trees, with some oak and beech, overshadow it on the right, and lead the eye onward to the ruins of the abbey, seen through this dark arch in remote perspective, over rough but verdant ground.
The principal features are the great northern window, and part of the eastern choir, with glimpses of shattered arches and stately walls beyond, caught between the gaping casements.
On the left, the bank of the glen is broken into knolls, capped with oaks, which, in some places, spread downwards to a stream that winds round the ruin, and darken it with their rich foliage.
Through this gate is the entrance to the immediate precincts of the abbey, an area said to contain sixty - five acres, now called the deer-park.
It is inclosed by a stone wall, on which the remains of many small buildings, and the faint vestiges of others, still appear, such as the porter's lodge, mills, granaries, ovens, and kilns, that once supplied the monastery; some of which, seen under the shade of the fine old trees that on every side adorn the broken steeps of this glen, have a very interesting effect. "
Just within the gate, a small manor-house of modern date, with its stables and other offices, breaks discordantly upon the lonely grandeur of the scene.
Except this, the character of the deserted ruin is scrupulously preserved in the surrounding area: no spade has dared to level the inequalities which fallen fragments have occasioned in the ground, or shears to clip the wild fern and underwood that overspread it; but every circumstance conspires to heighten the solitary grace of the principal object, and to prolong the luxurious melancholy which the view of it inspires.
We made our way among the pathless fern and grass to the north end of the church, now, like every other part of the abbey, entirely roofless, but shewing the lofty arch of the great window, where, instead of the painted glass that once enriched it, are now tufted plants and wreaths of nightshade.
Below is the principal door of the church, bending into a deep round arch, which, retiring circle within circle, is rich and beautiful; the remains of a winding staircase are visible within the wall on its left side.
Near this northern end of the edifice is seen one side of the eastern choir, with its too slender Gothic window-frames; and on the west, a remnant of the nave of the abbey, and some lofty arches, which once belonged to the belfry, now detached from the main building. "
To the south, but concealed from this point of view, is the chapter-house, some years ago exhibiting a roof of beautiful Gothic fret-work, and which was almost the only part of the abbey thus ornamented, its architecture having been characterized by an air of grand simplicity, rather than by the elegance and richness of decoration, which, in an after date, distinguished the Gothic style in England.
Over the chapter-house were once the library and scriptorium; and beyond it are still the remains of cloisters, of the refectory, the locutorium, or conversation room, and the calefactory.
These, with the walls of some chapels, of the vestry, a hall, and of what is believed to have been a school-house, are all the features of this noble edifice that can easily be traced; winding staircases within the surprising thickness of the walls, and doorcases involved in darkness and mystery, the place abounds with. "
The abbey, which was formerly of such magnitude as nearly to fill up the breadth of the glen, is built of a pale red stone, dug from the neighbouring rocks, now changed by time and weather to a tint of dusky brown, which accords well with the hues of plants and shrubs that every where emboss the mouldering arches. "
The finest view of the ruin is on the east side, where, beyond the vast shattered frame that once contained a richly painted window, is seen a perspective of the choir and of distant arches, remains of the nave of the abbey, closed by the woods.
This perspective of the ruin is said to be two hundred and eighty - seven feet in length; the choir part of it is in width only twenty - eight feet inside, but the nave is seventy; the walls, as they now stand, are fifty - four feet high, and in thickness five.
Southward from the choir extend the still beautiful, though broken, pillars and arcades of some chapels, now laid open to the day; the chapter-house, the cloisters, and beyond all, and detached from all, is the school-house, a large building, the only part of the monastery that still boasts of a roof. "
As, soothed by the venerable shades, and the view of a more venerable ruin, we rested opposite to the eastern window of the choir, where once the high altar stood, and, with five other altars, assisted the religious pomp of the scene; the images and manners of the times that were past rose to reflection.
The midnight procession of monks, clothed in white, and bearing lighted tapers, appeared to the mind's eye issuing to the choir through the very doorcase, by which such processions were wont to pass from the cloisters to perform the matin service, when, at the moment of their entering the church, the deep chanting of voices was heard, and the organ swelled a solemn peal.
To fancy, the strain still echoed feebly among the arcades, and died in the breeze among the woods, the rustling leaves mingling with the close.
It was easy to imagine the abbot and the officiating priests seated beneath the richly-fretted canopy of the four stalls, that still remain entire in the southern wall, and high over which is now perched a solitary yew tree, a black funeral memento to the living of those who once sat below. "
Of a quadrangular court on the west side of the church, three hundred and thirty - four feet long, and one hundred and two feet wide, little vestige now appears, except the foundation of a range of cloisters that formed its western boundary, and under the shade of which the monks, on days of high solemnity, passed in their customary procession round the court.
What was the belfry is now a huge mass of detached ruin, picturesque from the loftiness of its shattered arches, and the high inequalities of the ground within them, where the tower that once crowned this building, having fallen, lies in vast fragments, now covered with earth and grass, and no longer distinguishable but by the hillock they form. "
The school-house, a heavy structure attached to the boundary wall on the south, is nearly entire, and the walls, particularly of the portal, are of enormous thickness; but, here and there, a chasm discloses the staircases that wind within them to the chambers above.
The school-room below shows only a stone bench, that extends round the walls, and a low stone pillar on the eastern corner, on which the teacher's pulpit was formerly fixed.
The lofty vaulted roof is scarcely distinguishable by the dusky light admitted through one or two narrow windows placed high from the ground, perhaps for the purpose of confining the scholar's attention to his book. "
These are the principal features that remain of this once magnificent abbey.
It was dedicated to St. Mary, and received a colony of monks from the monastery of Savigny in Normandy, who were called Gray Monks, from their dress of that colour, till they became Cistercians, and with the severe rules of St. Bernard, adopted a white habit, which they retained till the dissolution of monastic orders in England.
The original rules of St. Bernard partook, in several instances, of the austerities of La Trappe, and the society did not very readily relinquish the milder laws of St. Benedict for the new rigours imposed upon them by the parent monastery of Savigny.
They were forbidden to taste flesh, except when ill, and even eggs, butter, cheese, and milk, but on extraordinary occasions; and denied even the use of linen and fur.
The monks were divided into two classes, to which separate departments belonged.
Those who attended the choir slept upon straw in their usual habits, from which, at midnight, they rose and passed into the church, where they continued their holy hymns, during the short remainder of the night.
After this first mass, having publicly confessed themselves, they retired to their cells, and the day was employed in spiritual exercises, and in copying or illuminating manuscripts.
An unbroken silence was observed, except when, after dinner, they withdrew into the locutorium, where, for an hour, perhaps, they were permitted the common privilege of social beings.
This class was confined to the boundary wall, except that, on some particular days, the members of it were allowed to walk in parties beyond it, for exercise and amusement; but they were very seldom permitted either to receive or pay visits.
Like the monks of La Trappe, however, they were distinguished for extensive charities and liberal hospitality; for travellers were so sumptuously entertained at the abbey, that it was not till the dissolution that an inn was thought necessary in this part of Furness, when one was opened for their accommodation, expressly because the monastery could no longer receive them. "
To the second class were assigned the cultivation of the lands and the performance of domestic affairs in the monastery. "
This was the second house in England that received the Bernadine rules, the most rigorous of which were, however, dispensed with in 1485 by Sextus the Fourth, when, among other indulgencies, the whole order was allowed to taste meat on three days of the week.
With the rules of St. Benedict, the monks had exchanged their gray habit for a white cassock, with a white caul and scapulary.
But their choir dress was either white or gray, with caul and scapulary of the same, and a girdle of black wool; over that a mozet, or hood, and a rochet.
When they went abroad, they wore a caul and full black hood. "
The privileges and immunities granted to the Cistercian order in general were very abundant; and those to the Abbey of Furness were proportioned to its vast endowments.
The abbot, it has been mentioned, held his secular court in the neighbouring castle of Dalton, where he presided, with the power of administering not only justice, but injustice, since the lives and property of the villain tenants of the lordship of Furness were consigned by a grant of King Stephen to the disposal of my lord abbot!
The monks also could be arraigned, for whatever crime, only by him.
The military establishment of Furness likewise depended on the abbot.
Every mesne lord and free homager, as well as the customary tenants, took an oath of fealty to the abbot, to be true to him against all men, excepting the king.
Every mesne lord obeyed the summons of the abbot, or his steward, in raising his quota of armed men, and every tenant of a whole tenement furnished a man and a horse of war for guarding the coast, for the border-service, or any expedition against the common enemy of the king and kingdom.
The habiliments of war were a steel coat, or coat of mail, a falce, or falchion, a jack, the bow, the byll, the cross-bow, and spear.
The Furness legion consisted of four divisions:-- one of bowmen horsed and harnessed; bylmen horsed and harnessed; bowmen without horse and harness; bylmen without horse and harness. "
The deep forests, that once surrounded the abbey, and overspread all Furness, contributed with its insulated situation, on a neck of land running into the sea, to secure it from the depredations of the Scots, who were continually committing hostilities on the borders.
On a summit over the abbey are the remains of a beacon, or watch-tower, raised by the society for their further security.
It commands extensive views over Low Furness, and the bay of the sea immediately beneath; looking forward to the town and castle of Lancaster, appearing faintly on the opposite coast; on the south, to the isles of Walney, Foulney, and their numerous islets, on one of which stands Peel Castle; and, on the north, to the mountains of High Furness and Coniston, rising in grand amphitheatre round this inlet of the Irish Channel.
-- Description can scarcely suggest the full magnificence of such a prospect, to which the monks, emerging from their concealed cells below, occasionally resorted to sooth the asperities which the severe discipline of superstition inflicted on the temper; or, freed from the observance of jealous eyes, to indulge, perhaps, the sigh of regret, which a consideration of the world they had renounced, thus gloriously given back to their sight, would sometimes awaken. "
From Hawcoat, a few miles to the west of Furness, the view is still more extensive, whence, in a clear day, the whole length of the Isle of Man may be seen, with part of Anglesey and the mountains of Caernarvon, Merionethshire, Derbyshire, and Flintshire, shadowing the opposite horizon of the channel. "
The sum total of all the rents belonging to the abbey immediately before the dissolution was 946 l. 2 s. 10 d. collected from Lancashire, Cumberland, and even from the Isle of Man; a sum which, considering the value of money at that time; and the woods, meadows, pastures, and fisheries, retained by the society in their own hands; the quantity of provisions for domestic use brought by the tenants instead of rent, and the shares of mines, mills, and salt-works, which belonged to the abbey, swells its former riches to an enormous amount. "
Pyle, the last abbot, surrendered with 29 monks, to Henry Viii.
April the 9th, 1537, and in return was made rector of Dalton, a situation then valued at 33 l. 6 s. 8 d. a year."
View From Birkrigg.
Those who visit the abbey on horseback would find an agreeable variety in returning to Ulverston, by way of Newton, Stainton, and Adgarly.
On the right are seen a deep embayed coast, the islands of Walney and Foulney, Peel Castle, and also the ruins of Gleaston Castle.
At Adgarly the richest iron ore is obtained in immense quantities.
From a beacon upon a rocky eminence called Birkrigg, at a short distance from Urswick, is a beautiful and extensive view.
To the north-east appears Ulverston, and behind it Furness Fells.
The back view is no less delightful.
In the flow of the tide, you see a fine branch of the sea widely extended, and bounded by steep shores and prominent rocks.
Beyond this expanse, a distant country is observed; the town and castle of Lancaster appear under a screen of high grounds, over which sable Clougha rears his head; and hence is seen Ingleborough behind several other mountains.
-- The carriage-road from the abbey to Ulverston is by Dalton.
Conishead Priory.
The priory of Conishead, a few miles distant from Ulverston, deserves a visit from every curious traveller.
From the pleasantness of its situation, it has been called the Paradise of Furness.
The house stands on the site of the priory, at the foot of a gentle eminence, from which the ground recedes on all sides.
The slopes are planted with shrubs and trees, which increase the elevation; and the waving woods on each wing give to the building a noble appearance.
The south front is in the modern taste, and is extended by an arcade.
The north is in the gothic style, and has a piazza and wings.
What, however, chiefly recommends this place to the curious, is the pleasure ground, which, though on a small scale, contains beauties equal to those possessed by gardens of the greatest extent.
The variety of culminated grounds and winding slopes furnishes all the advantages of mountains and vales, woods, and water.
The house commands a variety of pleasing views.
On the east side, you see a fine estuary, spotted with rocks, islands, and peninsulas; a shore, in some places deeply indented, and in others composed of arched and craggy promontories; and, in the back ground, stupendous mountains.
Under a range of tall sycamores, an expanse of water opens to the view; and, beyond it, land just visible appears through the azure mist.
Vessels traversing this bay afford a pleasing sight; and from the lower part of the house seem to sail through the trees, and to approach the building, till they anchor under the windows.
In short, the views are pleasing, grand, and impressive; and it would be unpardonable in the curious traveller who visits Furness Abbey, not to see the priory of Conishead, to which nature has been so lavish of her gifts, and which has also received the assistance of art.
Road To Kendal.
We now leave the neighbourhood of Ulverston, and retrace our route to Penny Bridge; from that place, we pursue the windings of the road leading from Ulverston to Kendal, for four or five miles, along the sides of hills and through coppices, to Newby Bridge, at the foot of Windermere.
In this part of the road, you pass several romantic farmhouses and cottages; some of them in valleys, and others appearing over gentle eminences.
At Backbarrow, which lies at a short distance on the right, are large iron furnaces.
The village of Booth is pleasantly situated, being surrounded with hills.
About three miles farther is Newby Bridge.
Here is a small but neat edifice belonging to Mr. Machel; and at a short distance, on the other side of a wooded hill, is the house of Mr. King, which stands embowered in thick groves.
Near this seat an obelisk has been erected upon the summit of the hill, and may be seen at a considerable distance.
From Newby Bridge is a fine view of the lake of Windermere; and here is a good inn, which affords convenient accommodations to travellers.
See the Plate.
Pursuing the road up the hill called Cartmel Fell, which, for a considerable way, commands a view of Windermere and the surrounding scenery, we direct our course towards Kendal.
Kendal.
Kendal, or Kirkby( pronounced Kirby) in Kendal, is pleasantly situated at the foot of some steep hills, on the River Ken or Kent, which rises in Kentmere, and gives name to this town and parish.
The principal street is about a mile in length, and is of a sufficient breadth.
Several of the other streets are narrow; but of late years, this place has been very much improved, particularly by the erection of a new street from the nearly the centre of the town to the river, which has opened a convenient avenue for carriages.
The pavement, however, is very rough, and is in great need of amendment.
The houses are all built of stone, with blue slated roofs; and this gives the town a very neat appearance.
Kendal has been long celebrated for its manufactures of coarse woollen cloths, termed Kendal cottons, linseys, serges,&amp; c., and especially of knit worsted stockings.
Of this last article great quantities are annually sold; and the making of them affords employment to considerable numbers of the country people: of late, however, the demand for knit worsted stockings is much lessened, and the employment which this branch of trade afforded is diminished in proportion.
Here also are some extensive tanneries, a manufactory of morocco leather, and of the marble procured from Kendal Fell.
These various occupations, together with some manufactures of less importance, have contributed to render Kendal both populous and opulent.
A few years ago, cotton mills and muslin weaving were introduced into this town; these proved, however, not only unsuccessful speculations, but are said to have had pernicious effects on the morals of the lower classes.
The canal, which has been cut from Lancaster to Kendal, and which was opened for general trade on the 18th day of June, in the present year, will, in all probability, add much to the commercial advantages of this town.
The market, which is large and well supplied, is held on Saturday.
King Richard I. originally granted it by charter, which was confirmed by Edward Ii.
and Iii., the last of which monarchs also gave permission to hold a fair here, in 1333.
At present Kendal has three fairs in the course of the year, chiefly for cattle, woollen cloths, and pedlary-ware.
The church is a spacious gothic structure, with a square tower containing ten bells.
The church is remarkable for three chapels, or choirs, memorials of the ancient dignity of three neighbouring families, the Bellinghams, Stricklands, and Parrs.
The extent of the chapel belonging to the last mentioned family, is shown by their arms on the ceiling; but the inclosures, which separated this chapel from the rest of the church, has long since been removed.
A fourth chapel, or choir, constitutes the body of the church, which has a handsome organ, and on the walls of which are inscribed numerous well-selected passages from the Holy Scriptures.
That over the pulpit is singularly appropriate, considered as an admonition to ministerial fidelity.
In a part of the church, not far from the communion table, is Bishop Jewell's admirable Defence of his Apology for the Church of England, chained to a desk for public reading.
Among the many handsome monumental inscriptions contained in this church, those of the late eminent Judge Wilson, and Romney the painter, in particular, deserve attention.
The singular epitaph of Mr. Tirer, who was vicar of Kendal in the former part of the seventeenth century, fails not to attract the notice of the visitor.
It is engraven on a brass plate, before the communion table. "
Cry aloud, spare not; lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and show my people their transgression, and the house of Jacob their sins."
Isaiah, ch.
lviii.
l. Here under lyeth ye body of Mr. Raulph Tirer, late Vicar of Kendal: Bachelor of Divinity, who died the 4th day of June, Ano.
Dni.
1627.
London bredd mee, Westminster fedd mee, Cambridge sped mee, My sister wedd meee, Study taught mee, Kendal caught mee, Labour pressed mee, Sickness distressed mee, Death oppressed mee, The Grave possessed mee, God first gave mee, Christ did save mee, Earth did crave mee, And Heaven would have mee.
Of Kendal Castle little is now remaining.
It stands upon a hill on the east side of the River Kent, in a strong and beautiful situation, and commands an extensive prospect.
It is supposed to have been erected on the site of a Roman fort.
It was once in the possession of the family of Parr, and was the birth-place of Catherine, the last queen of Henry Viii., a lady who( as Mr. Pennant quaintly observes)" had the good fortune to descend to the grave with her head, in all probability merely by outliving her tyrant."
A mutilated stone wall and four half demolished towers are all that now remain of this edifice, the appearance of which is rendered more picturesque by numerous hardy evergreen shrubs and trees, which have been planted on the outer side of the wall.
The deep moat, by which the castle was encompassed, is now overgrown with grass.
Opposite to the castle, on the west side, is Castlelaw Hill, which is a larger circular mount of gravel and earth, thrown up on a rock, and nearly thirty feet in height.
It is of considerable antiquity.
Dr. Stukely ascribes it to the Saxons; but others think it of Roman origin.
Its name would seem to signify that it was intended as a fort.
It is within sight of the Roman station at Water Crook; and, as Mr. Horsley observes, it bears a great resemblance to the exploratory mounts which are to be seen in other places, especially in the vicinity of the Roman military ways.
Another opinion, which the name of this artificial mount appears to sanction, is, that it was one of those hills called Laws, where justice was administered in ancient times.
In the year 1788, an handsome obelisk was erected upon the flat summit of this mount, with an inscription commemorating the glorious revolution which took place in 1688.
This town has given birth to several illustrious men, among whom may be noticed Dr. Shaw, the celebrated traveller in the East; and Sir Alan Chambre, late one of the judges in the court of Common Pleas, whose ancestors have been resident here ever since the reign of Henry Iii.
Kendal derives much advantage from being a place of considerable resort for tourists, most of whom take this town in their way either in returning from, or going to, Ambleside and Keswick.
It contains several commodious inns; and at the King's Arms tourists may be certain of being civilly treated and comfortably accommodated.
The traveller in this country will not regret the spending of half an hour at Mr. Todhunter's museum in this town, which contains specimens of the mineral and vegetable productions of Cumberland and Westmorland, together with a considerable variety of shells.
Levens Hall.
From Kendal to Levens Hall is a pleasant ride of five miles, on the east side of the River Kent, through the park; but it is necessary to obtain a key for the park, either at Levens or Kendal.
On the crest of a green hill below Natland are the vestiges of a castellum, called Castle Steads, which, Mr. West says," during the residence of the watchmen at Water Crook, corresponded( by smoke in the day and flame in the night) with the garrison at Lancaster from the beacon at Warton Crag."
There is also a house called Watch House, at a short distance on the north, where Roman coins are said to have been found.
Between Kendal and Sedgwick are some vestiges of Roman antiquity still discernible, particularly at Water Crook, and near the village of Natland.
The former Mr. West supposes to be the" Concangium of the Romans, where a body of the Vigilatores( or watchmen) kept guard, and was the intermediate station between the Dictis at Ambleside and the garrison at Overborough."
He also says," the line of the fosse may be still traced, though much defaced by the plough.
Altars, coins, and inscribed stones, have been found here.
And in the wall of the barn, on the very area of the station, is still legible the inscription preserved by Mr. Horsley, to the memory of two freedmen, with an imprecation against any one who should contaminate their sepulchre, and a fine to the fiscal."
Above the village of Sedgwick is a vein of marble, which extends across the river, and is wrought on both sides.
The Kent here flows through a deep, rocky, and narrow channel.
Near Sedgwick are the large gunpowder works belonging to Mr. John Wakefield.
Proceeding through Sedgwick, follow the course of the river, and from the Force Bridge, you obtain a romantic view of the water, hurrying through a narrow passage, in a deep glen, between high shelving rocks.
Near the forge is a waterfall of the whole river.
Levens Park, the property of R. Howard, Esq., is one of the loveliest scenes in England.
The woods, the rocks, the river, the grounds, rival each other, and combine in adding to the beauty of the place.
The windings of the river, and the projection of rocks under which it sometimes hastily retires, are extremely beautiful.
There is great variety, and much pleasing transition of scene.
Levens Hall is capable of being rendered a very delightful place.
The gardens are laid out in an old style, and are said to have been planned by a gardener of King James Ii., who resided here with Colonel Graham during some part of the troubles of his royal master.
Milnthorp.
From Levens proceed to Milnthorp, by way of Heversham, which is a neat and well-built village.
At Heversham is a good public school, at which the late Bishop Watson, the present vicar of Kendal, and many others, received their education.
The church at Heversham is a handsome structure, in the gift of Trinity College, Cambridge.
The present vicar is the Rev.
Dr. Lawson.
Milnthorp is a small market-town, and the only seaport in Westmorland.
It consists chiefly of one street; and at the east end are some good houses, in pleasant and open situations.
The surrounding lands are dry and fertile, and rise in gentle eminences.
Vessels belonging to this port trade to Liverpool, carrying hoops, casks, limestone, gunpowder,&amp; c. and returning with wood, merchants' goods,&amp; c. Others sail to Glasgow and Annan, in Scotland, carrying thither leather, Kendal manufactures,&amp; c. and bringing back grain, potatoes,&amp; c. What chiefly contributes to enliven the prospects in the neighbourhood of Milnthorp is Dallam Tower, the handsome seat of Daniel Wilson, Esq., which is situated at the mouth of the estuary.
A thick wood of tall trees adorns a steep hill behind the house; and in the front is a fine park well stocked with deer, and rising in a graceful prominence.
At Beetham Mill, near this place, is a waterfall on the River Beeloo, which is well worth the notice of the tourist.
At a short distance, on the left, you may observe Farlton Knot, a bold and lofty mountain, composed of bare limestone rock, which is said greatly to resemble the celebrated rock of Gibraltar.
Return to Kendal by way of Sizergh.
Sizergh Hall, a venerable old mansion, the seat of the ancient family of the Stricklands, stands in a pleasant situation, having some elevated ground behind, covered with wood and verdant turf, and fronting the east, where is a great extent of fertile and wooded lands on each side of the Kent.
This hall, like many ancient buildings, seems to have been erected for defence.
The tower is protected by two square turrets and battlements; one of which is over the great entrance, and has a guard-room, with embrasures, capable of containing ten or twelve men.
The winding staircase terminates in a turret, which defends the other entrance.
A Table Of The Heights Of Mountains And Lakes In The North Of England.
The heights of these mountains and lakes were taken by Mr. John Dalton of Manchester.
From this survey it appears that Seafell is the highest mountain in England, yet it is not so high as to be covered with permanent snow.
Sheep pasture the summits of Snowden and Helvellyn; and barrenness prevails upon the mountains in England only where rock and precipice prevent vegetation.
Mountains.
Seafell, north point east of Wastwater 1080 Helvellyn 1070 Skiddaw 1060 Bowfell( Langdale) 1030 Rydalhead 1030 Grasmere, north-east of Crummock Lake 955 Red Pike, near Buttermere 950 Kentmere High Street 912 Coniston Old Man 860 Whernside, near Dent 825 Hillbell, north-west of Kendal 812 Carrock, West Pike, Coldbeck 744 Knoutberry Hill, near Dent 728 Goatscar, summit of the road from Hawes Water to Kendal 663 Pendle Hill, Lancashire 548 Whinfell Beacon, north-east of Kendal 500 Rivington Pike, between Bolton and Chorley, Lancashire 400 Benson Knott, near Kendal 366 Penrith Beacon 340 Kendal Fell, north-west summit 216 Town of Kendal 46 Lakes.
Hawes Water 238 Leathes Water, Wythburn 182 Ullswater 160 Crummock Water 91 Derwent Water 76 Bassenthwaite Water 70 Esthwaite Water 66 Grasmere Water 60 Rydal Water 52 Windermere Water 36 Itinerary From London To Penrith, In Cumberland; And From Kendal To London.
Route I.
To Penrith, by Hatfield, Worksop, and Borough Bridge.
Miles Miles Miles Miles London Barnet 10 Ollerton 14 138 Hatfield 9 19 Worksop 8 146 Welwyn 6 25 Doncaster 17 163 Stevenage 6 31 Ferry Bridge 16 179 Baldock 6 37 Abberford 9 188 Biggleswade 7 44 Wetherby 7 195 Buckden 16 60 Borough Bridge 12 207 Alconbury Hill 7 67 Leeming Lane 16 223 Stilton 8 75 Catterick 6 229 Wandsford 8 83 Catterick Bridge 1 230 Stamford 6 89 Greta Bridge 14 244 Greetham 8 97 Bowes 6 250 Coltersworth 5 102 Brough 13 263 Grantham 8 110 Appleby 8 270 Newark 14 124 Penrith 14 285 Route Ii.
From Kendal to London, by Lancaster and End Moor.
Miles Miles Miles Miles Kendal Burton 11 Derby 14 136 Lancaster 11 22 Loughborough 16 152 Garstang 11 33 Leicester 12 164 Preston 11 44 Market Haborough 14 178 Chorley 9 53 Northhampton 17 195 Bolton 12 65 Newport Pagnell 15 210 Manchester 11 76 Woburn 9 219 Stockport 6 82 Dunstable 10 229 Bullock Smithey 3 85 St. Alban's 13 242 Macclesfield 9 94 Barnet 10 252 Leek 13 107 London 10 262 Ashburn 15 122 Distances Of Places In The Tour Of The Lakes.
Miles Penrith to Hawes Water, by Lowther, Askham, and Bampton 11 Penrith to Ullswater foot 5 Thence to Patterdale, or head of Ullswater 9-- Brother Water 2-- Ambleside, over Kirkstone 7 From Ullswater foot to Keswick 15 Thence to Lowdore Water Fall 3-- Grange 1-- Bowdar Stone, Castle Hill 1-- Rosthwaite 2 -- Seathwaite 2 -- Wastwater, over Stye Head 4 -- Keswick by Watenlath 13  From Keswick to Buttermere 8 Thence to Scale Force 1  From Buttermere to Lorton, down Crummock Water 6 Thence to Keswick 7 From Keswick to Armathwaite, down the east side of Bassenthwaite Water 8 Thence to Keswick, up the other side 9 From Keswick to Castlerigg 1 Thence to Leathes Water 4-- Dunmail Raise stones 4 -- Grasmere 2 -- Rydal 2-- Ambleside 2 From Ambleside to Skelwith, and Culwith Force, and Elter Water 4-- Ambleside to Bowness 6 Thence to the Ferry House across Windermere 2-- Hawkshead 4-- Coniston Water head 3-- Coniston Water foot 6-- Lowick Bridge 2 -- Penny Bridge 2-- Ulverston 4 From Lowick Bridge to Ulverston 5 Ulverston to Dalton and Furness Abbey, and back to Ulverston 12 Thence to Kendal 20-- Levens, on the east side of the Kent, and return to Kendal by Sizergh 10 The End.
London: Printed By Thomas Davison, Whitefriars.
