The Gentleman's Magazine, Vol.
Xvii.
A Journey to Caudebec Fells, with a Map and Description of the same.
One curiosity is apt to excite another; after visiting Cross Fells, my inclinations led me to examine those of Caudebeck, that lateral detachment of the British Alps, which overspreads great part of Cumberland, and distinguished by insuperable precipices, and towering peaks, and exhibiting landskapes of a quite different and more romantic air than any part of the general ridge, and of nearer affinity to the Switzerland Alps.
My intention in this journey was to visit the Wadd Mines, the peculiar product of these mountains, and no where else discovered on the globe; but as they are kept close shut up, and the weather was extremely unfavourable, I deferred that examination to a more proper time, and contented myself with the varieties in the neighbourhood of Mose Dale; here I found villages in the narrow bottoms, that feel no more benefit from the solar rays for two months, about the winter solstice, than the old Cimmerians, or the Laplanders who inhabit about the North Cape of Norway.
Swinsted on Cauda is a strong instance that the property of the Artic circle is not confined to those unhappy regions which lie within 23 degrees of the pole, especially with regard to the solar light.
These mountains differ not only in figure, but are very dissimilar in property to the main body, being dry, smooth, and more agreeably verdant, where precipices occur not.
The rocks upon which they are built, being of a fissile absorbent nature, serving to imbibe the descending rains, which are thrown off from the more compact strata of the general ridge, and take broken and uneven courses, through the loose and spongey texture of their outward covering, forming sometimes morasses, but more frequently rotten bogs, and sinuous mires of difficult passage.
No such disagreeable objects interrupt the traveller here if he guards against the precipices, he has no other danger to encounter.
Of which see the description, p. 384-3.
The most common plants which I observed are, Adianthum nigrum officinarum( of Ray) black maiden hair.
Lujula, acetosa sylvestris, wood or mountain sorrel.
Muscus squammosus montanus repens, sabinae folio Muscus clavatus juniperinis foliis reflexis, clavis singularibus sine pediculis.
Several mosses of the capsulated kind.
Brush moss.
Rorella longifolia perennis, and other sun-dews.
The shrubs rising from the latices of the rocks, are dwarf birch, dwarf mountain oak, of so untractable a genius that no soil will meliorate it.
Fraxinus sylvestris, ornus montana, wild mountain ash, with red fruit.
I do not remember to have seen this tree in the South, nearer than Derbyshire; it differs both in size and leaf from the service tree, of which species it is, according to the botanists, and is very ripe; the superstitious use it against witchcraft.
The only bird peculiar to these rocks is the raven.
It is a received Cumberland proverb, that the mountains of Caudebeck are worth all England besides, but it has not yet been verifyed by experience; and if we may be allowed to conjecture from the nature of their stones, found in the rivulets and quarries, it may be difficult to ssay when they will.
Most of their lapilli are a fluor of the stalactite kind, or a sparry talc resembling white flint, variegated with hexagonal crystalline spars, whose points will cut glass like the adamant, but immediately lose that property from their fragile quality.
Others are impregnanted with the marcasite of lead, but so blended with an arsenical sulphur that they evaporate in the process of separation, and others are of the copperas kind; all of them contained such heterogeneal qualities in their composition, as never to yield a proper gratification for the tryal.
Their quarries, also, only abound with a fissile blueish slate, useful for the covering of their houses, but very remote from the metalline nature: Indeed in Brandlegill Beck, and the Northern descents, copper has been formerly dug, but the mines are long since worn out; hereabouts the lapis calaminaris is also found.
Under mount Skiddow is the head of the River Cauda; it issues through a narrow trough, and takes its winding course with great rapidity to Mosedale, where it turns northward for Carlisle.
Near two miles above that village( Mosedale) it receives a small rivulet from Bouscale Tarn, a lake near a mile in circumference, on the side of a high mountain, so strangely surrounded with a more eminent amphitheatrical ridge of quarry rocks, that it is excluded the benefit of the sun for a least four months, in the middle of winter; but this is not its only singularity.
Several of the most credible inhabitants thereabouts, affirming that they frequently see the stars in it at mid-day; but in order to discover that phaenomenon, the firmament must be perfectly clear, the air stable, and the water unagitated.
These circumstances not concurring at the time I was there, deprived me of the pleasure of that sight, and of recommending it to the naturalists upon my own ocular evidence, which I regret the want of, as I question if the like has been any where else observed.
The spectator must be situated at least 200 yards above the lake, and as much below the summit of the semi-ambient ridge; and as there are other high mountains, which in that position may break and deaden the solar rays, I can only give an implicit credit to the power of their agency,' till I am convinced of their effects, and am qualified to send it better recommended to the publick.
At Grisedale the water turns both ways, so that in a sudden shower you may with your foot only, send the rain-water, either to Carlisle or Cockermouth, by the channels of Cauda or Lender Maken.
This last springs under Sadle back, a Parnassian eminence, with two prominent peaks; the most northernly is called Blencarter, a surprizingly high precipice of the quarry kind.
Souter Fell is a distinguished mountain of itself, encompassed quite round with a turbinated trough, through which Lender Maken is conveyed.
The West and North sides are barricadoed with rocks, the East is more plain but withal steep, and seemingly 900 yards in height, but every where of difficult access.
It was on this Fell that the astonishing phaenomenon appeared to exhibit itself, which in 1735, 1737 and 1745 made so much noise in the North, that I went on purpose to examine the spectators, who asserted the fact, and continue in their assertion very positively to this day.
On Midsummer eve 1735, Wm Lancaster' s servant related that he saw the East side of Souter Fell, towards the top, covered with a regular marching army for above an hour together; he said they consisted of distinct bodies of troops, which appeared to proceed from an eminence in the North end, and marched over a nitch in the top,[ marked A and B in my drawing] but as no other person in the neighbourhood had seen the like, he was discredited and laughed at.
Two years after on Midsummer eve also, betwixt the hours of eight and nine, Wm Lancaster himself imagined that several gentlemen were following their horses at a distance, as if they had been hunting, and taking them for such, payed no regard to it, till about ten minutes after, again turning his head towards the place, they appeared to be mounted, and a vast army following, five in rank, crowding over at the same place, where the servant said he saw them two years before.
He then called his family, who all agreed in the same opinion; and what was most extraordinary, he frequently observed that some one of the five would quit rank, and seem to stand in a fronting posture, as if he was observing and regulating the order of their march, or taking account of the numbers, and after some time appeared to return full gallop to the station he had left, which they never failed to do as often as they quitted their lines, and the figure that did so, was generally one of the middlemost men in the rank.
As it grew later, they seemed more regardless of discipline, and rather had the appearance of people riding from a market, than an army, though they continued crowding on, and marching off, as long as they had light to see them.
This phaenomenon was no more seen' till the Midsummer eve, which preceded the rebellion, when they were determined to call more families to be witnesss of this sight, and accordingly went to Wilton Hill and Souter Fell-side, till they convened about 26 persons, who all affirm they then saw the same appearance, but not conducted with the usual regularity as the preceding ones, having the likeness of carriages interspersed; however it did not appear to be less real, for some of the company were so affected with it as in the morning to climb the mountain, through an idle expectation of finding horse-shoes, after so numerous an army, but they saw not the vestige or print of a foot.
Wm Lancaster, indeed, told me that he never concluded they were real beings, because of the impracticability of a march over the precipices, where they seemed to come on; that the night was extremely serene; that horse and man upon strict looking at appeared to be but one being, rather than two distinct ones; they were nothing like any clouds or vapours, which he had ever perceived elsewhere; that their number was incredible, for they filled lengthways near half a mile, and continued so in a swift march for above an hour, and much longer he thinks if night had kept off.
This whole story has so much the air of a romance, that it seemed fitter for Amadis de Gaul, or Glanville' ls system of Witches, than the repository of the learned; but as the country was full of it, I only give a verbatim from the original relation of a people, that could have no end in imposing on their fellow-creatures, and are of good repute in the place where they live.
It is my real opinion, that they apprehended they saw such appearances, but how an undulating lambent meteor could affect the optics of so many people is difficult to say.
No doubt fancy will extend to miraculous heights in persons disposed to indulge it; and whether there might not be a concurrence of that, to assist the vapour, I will not dispute, because three difficulties seem to occur, worthy of solution.
1 st, Why a lambent agitated meteor should appear to stop at certain intervals, and return with augmented velocity to reassume the forsaken place.
2 d, Why it should for a very long time preserve so regular a system, as to appear still five in a line.
3 d. Why one particular evening in the year, only, exhibited the unusual meteor for three times, at so long intervals.
As these are at present beyond my philosophy to explain, it may be an amusement to such as will give themselves the trouble of enquiry, having neither added nor diminished to the accounts given me.
Those who treat it as a mere illusion or deceptio visus, should assign reasons for so large a fascination in above 20 persons; probably one, indeed, might serve to aggrandize the fancy of others, but I should think they could not be so universally deceived without some stamina of the likeness exhibited on the mountain from a meteor, or some unknown cause.
To this relation we may add that in the spring of the year 1707, early in a serene still morning, was observed by two persons, one of the name of Churchhill, who were walking from one village to another in Leicestershire, a like appearance of an army marching along, till going behind a great hill, it disappeared.-- The forms of pikes and carbines were distinguishable, the arch was not entirely in one direction, but was at the first like the junction of two armies, and the meeting of generals.
It is singularly remarkable, that most of all these mountains have their precipices fronting the West and Northwest, which is a strong collateral proof of the Earth's motion, because the diurnal revolution would naturally throw off all the loose strata in its fluid state to the opposite quarter, and the concurring suffrage of travellers in the same properties of foreign mountains, where reasons are not obvious for their being otherwise, much strengthens the argument.
I shall reserve my further observations in my surveys of the several parts of England for your intended new maps.
Those which have of late appeared are entirely old things, and not worth looking on; for though you mention but eleven parks omitted in that of Berks, I could not imagine that a noble duke's seat so near London and the present road to the shire town should be omitted; so that I need not wonder at their losing credit every day.
I am, Sir,&amp; c.
