The Gentleman's Magazine, For January 1748.
Extract of a Letter giving an Account of a Survey of the N. West Coast of England, in August 1746. at our Expence.
Sir, I Was made extremely sensible of the want of correct maps in the course of my survey; in my opinion, the nation ought to encourage general meridians through Britain, at least from Berwick to the south coast of England, as has been done in France.
Geography gains ground fast, and by a few observations of the eclipses of Jupiter' s satellites, made at different places by proper observators, our longitudes might all be corrected.
The principal objection, I own, is the great expence of the work; but it is well known that Moll' s little erroneous trifles, built altogether on copy, took very well, and certainly in a more curious age, correct ones would not want encouragement.
It was my business every night to prepare meridians, by the north-pole, in case of mistakes by the needle, after allowance made for the position of the pole-star from the point of the earth's produced axis, against my mornings works.
I could not find, that the points of Darwent mouth bore near so much west as supposed in the present maps, the makers of which, I imagine, depended on the magnetical meridian more than the solar one.-- And, indeed, as the difference of the magnetical and solar meridians is very near 18 ° on this coast, it is not to be wondered that surveys, following the needle, should throw all promontories so much south of west, and all coasts too much west of south, as seems to be the case, in constructing on these principles; the magnetical being a false meridian, though sailors use it for a true one.
Observations by the magnetical needle uncorrected by the solar, are at least about 1 ½ point west of the north.
It has encreased on this coast since 1715 from 14 ° to 17 ° 30', where it is now, but is still encreasing.-- I have marked the position of the sands from the best intelligence-- Though the sea coast is most useful to be taken as it appears, for the service of mariners, yet it is great pity that public encouragement is not offered for accurate maps of the land also.
I began, at the monuent on Burgh Marsh, to measure off the Solway bay; and as the ground was very low, I took several bases of triangles, to measure the opposite shore, and fix its Principal points.
For general heights to keep constantly in my eye, I fixed on three remarkable mountains, as judging they might be seen through the greatest part of the extent of my survey; these were Skiddow in Cumberland, Criffield, and Burnswark in Scotland, which appeared, as in the draights.
The distances were determined thus: I measured a base line on Burgh Marsh, after correcting the magnetical meridian; this was directed to a tree on an eminence near Drumbugh, as judging it the longest course in a plain.
I carefully examined every angle from each of these stations, and fixed the several places as specified in my draught.
It took me up some time to get proper assistants, and fix Skiddow, one of my principal aims; the ground besides being very troublesome, by reason of the frequent creeks and quick sands, so I could reach no farther than Bowness on the 27th at night.
From the monument the coast is extremely low on the English side, and a fine pasture till Drumbugh.
At Bowness I took a new meridian to ascertain the truth of my triangles.
It is properly so called from the bend of the coast at this promontory, which is the most remarkable one on the Solway bay, at least on the English side.
It is to be remarked that the River Eden has of late years kept almost close under the Scotch shore, but its course is constantly varying by the rapidity of land floods at low ebbs, through such a soft and slimy sand, that no chart can be given with certainty of its freshwater course; besides, the sands are extremely uncertain and dangerous to enter upon.
At Fishgarth I measured a fresh base at low ebb, to adjust Workington light-house, and proceeded forward by Uln or Eln foot.
Maps are divided how to spell this river, but it seems most reasonable Uln or Ulhn, because above Ierby, where this water flows, the dale or valley is called Uln Dale, and the church Uln Dale church.
Again from Ellenborough, near its mouth, one would be induced to write it Ellon, and' tis commonly called at its exit Eln Foot.
From Eln Foot the shore is a fine hard sand, and the coast above at some distance high and woody, particularly above Flimby, a little village with saltpans; these woods are called Flimby parks, and the country assumes a better aspect.
When we get to a single house called the Boin, the coast elbows round, and the whole track from thence to Darwent mouth is a low, benty soil, so broken with rabbets, that' tis almost impossible to ride it after night falls.
The River Darwent is the second for magnitude in Cumberland; it might be made navigable to Cockermouth, by cutting through some grounds, and erecting locks; for it admits ships of tolerable burthen for coasters to Workington.
Workington seems a town of pretty trade, above 50 vessles belong to it, and the harbour dilates above the pier, which breaks the extreme violence of the tides by westerly winds, and affords a good harbour; but as it lay out of my limit I passed the Darwent in a boat, and proceeded to follow the course of the coast.
On the opposite side we came up with the light-house and high land which we had seen for several miles; they are principal sea-marks for Workington harbour, and the Scotch coast, which appears exactly as I have drawn it.
The land was now high again, but skirted with low, benty ground for rabbet warrens, with which the whole coast from the Grune abounds; but makes a very bad appearance, because the eye is presently taken off by the height of the banks on your left hand, which of themselves form a very indifferent landskip.
I had now lost Skiddow and Burnswark, Criffield only remained on the Scotch shore, but the Isle of Man was visible enough, though the horizon was hazy, and the sea very rough.
At Harrington salt pans, and before, the coast from bad grew worse and worse; the rocks, or stones equal to rocks, grew insupportable for either horse or foot.
I ordered the horses up land at the foot-ways cut from the pans along very steep, rocky brows, finding the coast now impracticable for riding, and walked under the shocking precipices, where no mortal could have gone in spring tides, because the sea washes them to a great height.
The sea was then full and stormy, and I often felt it sprinklings, broke into drops by the violent shock upon the low rocks, on whose top was all the path we had.
Both Harrington salt-pans, which are now wrought, and the old ones of Leuco, which are tumbling into ruins every spring tide, are shockingly situated.
After a fine coast and inland, we came to Whitehaven, which is a thriving and well-built town; it exceeds Carlisle in extent about ⅓, but is thrice as populous.
The streets are extremely straight and regular in most places; there is a general appearance of industry amongst the inhabitants, and the hurry and bustle which accompanies their trade seems to be natural and easy/ The vast supply of coals in this neighbourhood has raised this port from a fishing town to be the next after Bristol and Liverpool on the west sea, and the roads leading to it are equal to the best turnpikes about London, and are every day improving, and carrying forward.
Its situation is low in comparison of the great height of the coast on all sides of it, and the harbour is barricadoed with several piers to bridle the fury of the west winds, to which it is greatly exposed.
Here the country puts on a much better appearance, and a fine vale encricles Bees Head from Whitehaven to the little brook below Sea Cote, full of pleasant villages, and country seats; so that if you have no accident by the way in so long a journey, you will not repent visiting Whitehaven.
There is a small fort at the outer pier, to command the harbour, of no great strength by situation; there seems wanting a lower battery on their pier itself.-- On the 30th we reached Bees Head, where is a light-house, but, in my opinion, the cradel is too much sunk within the battlements to afford a serviceable light to sailors; the point indeed is so prodigiously exposed, that a greater elevation would occasion a far greater consumption of fire; but coals are so plentiful in this neighbourhood, the expence ought not to be regarded, as' tis the first land that sailors from the west endeavour to make.
They compute it 10 leagues from this promontory to the Isle of Man, I make it more by connecting of triangels, to the Paps of Man, whither I took my aim.
The town or village of St Bees is pleasantly situated in a vlae, where they suppose the sea formerly flowed; here is a good free-school, and a fine retreat for youth; it is equal to several market towns in bigness, but the market of Whitehaven has attracted the business, and left St Bees a village only.
From hence we found the sand and shingle very loose and chaffy, which occasions great labour to the traveller till we came to the Caldar, a stream running, through very romantic prospects, into the sea, without any harbour.
At about a mile distant from Caldar mouth is a very dangerous rock, only seen at extreme low ebbs.
It is called Drig Rock, and in the course of seven years has only been observed twice.
Here is abundance of all kinds of crabs and lobsters, and other testaceous fish, and the largest oysters of Britain.
The Gentleman's Magazine, For July 1748.
Description of the Cumberland Coast; a new Survey, Continued from page 5.
From Bowness the coast continues high for about a mile westward to How point; when it falls low again, winding by Scargevil Head, till we come to Cardronac bay, which is a very dangerous one, being full of shifting quicksands, by reason of the rivers and land waters; these, after rains, hurry the sand into a loose sludge, which must be washed with several tides before it consolidates afresh, so that no traveller, or even the inhabitants, can pass it with certainty at all times.-- This bay is by some supposed the Mori Cambe of Ptolemy, but I rather think it to be Ken sands.
There has been an old castle at the cote of Skinburn Naze, probably to guard the bay; a deep creek flows up to it rendering it navigable, so that brandy sloops drive on a strong trade here, because of the impossibility of an officer getting at them, especially from the Cardronac side.
On the south of the bay lies Holm Abbey, eminent for the residence of the princes of Scotland; it resembles the escurial in Spain, having been both a palace and a monastery; but the description of Virgil's Tenedos may be now applied to it.
-- Dives opum Priami dum regna manebant.
Nunce deserta quidem.
AEn.
2.
Cardronac is an insignificant village in a wretched country, almost quite invironed with sea and morasses.
The Grune is a remarkable head of land, whose position the common maps have widely mistaken.
It is now only a rabbet warren, and hardly any vestige left where an antient chapel stood, called the chapel of the Grune; the whole is a low beachy coast.
The Dutch would make a gainful acquisition by diking of this bay, was it in Holland, for the tide recedes so as one may pass it in any place for several hours together.
From hence the coast inclines more southerly, but is so extremely poor, that one could not meet with a single public house, or any other refreshment, from Holm Abby, where I lodged the fourth night, to Allonby on the coast, where night overtook us again.
This whole coast, till you come at a house called Beckfoot, is full of sandy hills, blown and raised by the winds, and are very tiresome travelling upon-- Allonby is grown from a petty village to have a kind of market, especially in the summer; it stretches along the coast in a straggling manner, but is tolerably well built, and has a considerable concourse for bathing in the sea.
Hill House is a sea-mark, because it stands pretty high, and is made use of in the same manner almost as Dubmill House, to avoid a dangerous sand, which stretches almost from Workington - bar to the Scotch coast.
When Howmichael chapel and the saddle on Bees head are in one line, you may avoid the Swap; and when Dubmill House and mount Skiddow are in a line, you are on the tail of Dubmill swap, and so may turn down the Salway;' tis about half a mile broad.
Hence we have low coast till you pass the Blue Dial; then the shore begins to be banky, and rises by degrees to the Bankend point, with a skirt of low ground under the banks, for rabbet warrens.
The sea-sand is full of stones, some pretty large.
On this shore I saw the star-fish, the concha, periwinkle, and pectines, and hardly any other kind.
The coast, all along from Skinburn Naze, is entangled with sea-holly, and very few other herbs, save the serpyllum and rest-harrow.
Ravenglass is but a small town, consisting of a single row of houses in an isthmus, so surrounded with water, that travellers are sometimes obliged to wait four or five hours before they can get to it, without riding almost up to the mountains.
If there was occasion for it, a very small matter would render it unapproachable.
The Perch is a word used here for the mouth of a harbour; there is a long pole raised in the middle of the channel of Ravenglass harbour for a post of direction; to such as these, candles and lanthorns are affixed, for night guides in most places.
This harbour is extremely ill represented in all maps; certainly no geographer has ever inspected it: Three tolerable streams empty themselves into in, whose names and course you have in the draught.
Of all the three streams, Esk is the farthest navigable, even a great way above Moncaster hall, Sir Jospeh Pennington' s seat, quite to the mountains, for vessels of tolerable burthen.
Notwithstanding the governement keeps a preventing officer at this town, he is so flood-locked that he must often be an idle spectator of the foul practice of smuggling, without having it in his power to prevent it. '
Tis surprizing, that there is not a station boat allowed, that might enable him to go out at all times, to inspect vessels of that kind, for few others ever call here; from the sea-side is a very shocking landskip of fells and precipices, bare and quite void of soil to westward, as it observed through the world( See vol.
xvii.
p.
525.)
so that whilst the east side affords fine pasturage, the west will hardly support a goat.
Amidst these precipices, shocking as they are, many beautiful narrow vales are interspersed, and kept so warm, that they produce a fine breed of large cattle, contrary to the usual custom of mountains.
Had the rebels retreated this way, as was once apprehended, they must have perished for want of subsistence, but they understood the country better.
Was it not for its weekly market, Ravenglass would decline; but that and the merchants of Whitehaven useing it sometimes as a building place for vessels, because materials are cheaper, contribute to its preservation.
Getting to Stubb Place, I renewed my observations to the Isle of Man, and Bees Head.
Under Bankend I also made observations to three several places in the Man, and three other places.
I measured a fresh base line to fix Southfield point, on a very stoney shore of 88 chains.
Off this head a sailor assured me that a very large stone, as big or bigger than his vessel, lies about three miles from land, bare at low ebbs, that he has seen it several times, and has sailed very near it.
