Rambles In The Lake Country And Its Borders.
By Edwin Waugh. "
And so, by many winding nooks he strays, With willing sport, to the wild ocean."
Manchester: John Heywood, 143, Deansgate.
London: Simpkin, Marshall, And Co. 1864.
Contents.
Page Norbreck 1 Over Sands To The Lakes 43 Seaside Lakes And Mountains Of Cumberland 107 Silverdale 193 Notes 239 Norbreck: A Sketch On The Lancashire Coast.
Chapter The First.
Come unto these yellow sands Then take hands: Court' sied when you have, and kissed( the wild waves whist) The Tempest At the western edge of that quiet tract of Lancashire, called" The Fylde," lying mainly between Wyre, Ribble, and the Irish Channel, the little wind-swept hamlet of Norbreck stands, half asleep, on the brow of a green ridge close to the sea.
The windows of a whitewashed cottage wink over their garden wall, as the traveller comes up the slope, between tall hedge-rows; and very likely he will find all so still, that, but for wild birds that crowd the air with music, he could hear his footsteps ring on the hard road, as clearly as if he were walking on the flags of a gentleman's greenhouse.
In summer time, when its buildings are glittering in their annual suit of new whitewash, and when all the country road looks green and glad, it is a pleasant spot to set eyes upon, - this quiet little hamlet overlooking the sea.
All that time of year it smells of roses, and of" cribs where oxen lie;" and the place is so steeped in murmurs of the ocean, that its natural dreaminess seems deepened thereby.
I cannot find that any great barons of the old time, or that any world-shaking people have lived there; or that any great events which startle a nation have happened on that ground; but the tranquil charm that fills the air repays for the absence of historic fame.
There is seldom much stir in Norbreck, except what the elements make.
The inhabitants would think the place busy with a dozen people upon its grass-grown road at once, whatever the season might be.
It is true that on fine days in summer I have now and then seen a little life just at the entrance of the hamlet.
There, stands a pretty cottage, of one storey, consisting of six cosy rooms, that run lengthwise; its white walls adorned with rose trees and fruit trees, and its widows bordered with green trellis work.
Two trim grass-plats with narrow beds of flowers, and neat walks mosaically paved with blue and white pebbles from the sea, fill up the front garden, which a low white wall and a little green gate encloses from the road.
In front of this cottage I have sometimes seen a troop of rosy children playing about a pale girl, who was hopelessly infirm, and, perhaps on that account, the darling of the household.
I have seen her rocking in the sun, and with patient melancholy, watching the gambols of these merry children, whilst they strove to please her with all kinds of artless attentions.
Poor Lucy!
Sometimes, after swaying to and fro thoughtfully in her chair, she would stop and ask questions that sent her father out of the room to wipe his eyes. "
Papa, are people lame in heaven?"
" Papa, are angels poorly sometimes, like we are here?
"** It is one of those beautiful compensations that mingle with the worst mishaps of life that such a calamity has often the sweet effect of keeping kind hearts continually kind.
The poor Lancashire widow, when asked why she seemed to fret more for the loss of her helpless lad than for any of her other children, said she could n't tell, except it was" because hooed had to nurse the poor thing moor nor o' tother put together."
Surely" there is a soul of god in all things evil."
About this pretty cottage, where little Lucy lives, is the busiest part of the hamlet in summer time.
There may chance to be two or three visitors sauntering in the sunshine; or, perhaps, old Thomas Smith, better known as" Owd England," the sea-beaten patriarch of Norbreck, may paddle across the road to look after his cattle, or, staff in hand, he may be going down to" low water" a-shrimping, with his thin hair playing in the breeze.
Perhaps Lizzy, the milkmaid, may run from the house to the shippon, with her skirt tucked up, and the neb of an old bonnet pulled down to shade her eyes; or Tom, the cow lad, may be leaning against a sunny wall, whistling, and mending his whip, and wondering how long it wants to dinner-time.
There may be a fine cat dozing on the garden all, or gliding stealthily towards the outhouses, with dainty step, noiseless as a little cloud, and considering to herself whether this would be a likely time to surprise the mouse which slipped her in a certain corner of the barn yester-evening.
These are the common features of life there.
For the rest, the sounds heard are mainly the cackle of poultry, the clatter of milk cans, the occasional bark of a dog, the distant lowing of kine, a snatch of country song floating from the fields, the wild birds'" tipsy routs of lyric joy," and that all-embracing murmur of the surge which fills one's ears wherever we go.
In Norbreck everything smacks of the sea.
On a grassy border of the road, about the middle of the hamlet, there is generally a pile of wreck waiting the periodical sale which takes place all along the coast.
I have sometimes looked at this pile, and thought that perhaps to this or to that spar some seaman might have clung with desperate energy among the hungry waters, until he sank overpowered into his uncrowded grave.
The walls of gardens and farm-yards are mostly built of cobles gathered from the beach, sometimes fantastically laid in patterns of different hues.
The garden beds are edged with shells, and the walks laid with blue and white pebbles.
Here and there are rockeries of curiously-shaped stones from the shore.
Every house has its little store of marine rarities, which meet the eye on cornices and shelves wherever we turn.
Now and then we meet with a dead sea-mew on the road; - and noisy flocks of gulls make fitful excursions landwards, parti - cularly in ploughing time, when they crowd after the plough to pick slugs and worms out of the new furrows.
With a single exception, all the half - dozen dwellings in Norbreck are on one side of the road with their backs to the north.
On the other side there are gardens, and a few whitewashed outhouses, with weather-beaten walls.
The main body of the hamlet consists of a great irregular range of buildings, formerly the residence of a wealthy family.
This pile is now divided into several dwellings, in some of which are snug retreats for such as prefer the seclusion of this sea-nest to the bustle of a great watering-place.
A little enclosed lawn, belonging to the endmost of the group, and then a broad field, divides this main cluster from the only other habitation.
The latter seems to stand off a little, as if it had more pretensions to gentility than the rest.
It is a picturesque house, of different heights, built at different times.
At the landward end, a spacious yard, with great doors close to the road, contains the outbuildings, which have an old-fashioned weather-vane on the top of them.
The lowmost part of the dwelling is a combination of neat cottages of one storey; the larger and newer part is a substantial brick edifice of two storeys, with attics.
This portion has great bow windows, which sweep the sea-view finely, from the coast of Wales, round by the Isle of Man, to the mountains of Cumberland.
I summer time, the white walls of the cottage part are covered with roses and creeping plants, and there is an air of order and tasteful rusticity about the whole, even to the neat coble pavement which borders the wayside.
On the top of the porch a stately peacock sometimes struts, like a spangled showman in front of a booth, whilst his mate paces to and fro, cackling on the field wall immediately opposite.
There are probably a few poultry pecking about the front; and, if it happens to be a sunny day, a fine old English bearhound, of the Lyme breed, called" Lion," and not so much unlike his namesake in the main, may be stretched in a sphynx-like posture on the middle of the road, as if the whole Fylde belonged to him by right of entail; and slowly moving his head with majestic gaze, as if turning over in his mind whether or not it would be polite to take a piece out of the passing traveller for presuming to walk that way.
Perhaps in the southward fields a few kine are grazing and whisking their tails in the sunshine, or galloping from gap to gap impelled by the gad-fly's spur; and it may happen that some wanderer from Blackpool can be seen on the cliffs, with his garments flapping in the breeze.
Except these, and the rolling surge below, all is still at this end of the hamlet, unless the jovial face of the owner appear above the wall that encloses his outbuildings, wishing the passer-by" the fortune of the day."
Norbreck, as a whole, is no painfully genteel in appearance, but it is sweet and serene, and its cluster of houses seems to know how to be comfortable, without caring much for display.
Dirt and destitution are unknown there; in fact, I was told that this applies generally to all the scattered population of that quiet Fylde country.
Though there are many people there whose means of existence are almost as simple as those of the wild bird and the field mouse, yet squalor and starvation are strangers amongst them.
If any mischance happen to these Fylde folk, everybody knows everybody else, and, somehow, they stick to one another like Paddy's shrimps, - if you take up one you take up twenty.
The road, which comes up thither from many a mile of playful meanderings through the green country, as soon as it quits the last house, immediately dives through the cliffs, with a sudden impulse, as if it had been reading" Robinson Crusoe," and had been drawn all that long way solely by its love for the ocean.
The sea-beach at this spot is a fine sight at any time, but in a clear sunset the scene is too grand to be touched by any imperfect words.
Somebody has very well called this part of the coast," the region of glorious sunsets."
When the waters retire, they leave a noble solitude, when a man may wander a mile or to north or south, upon a floor of sand finer than any marble," and yet no footing seen," except his own; nor any sounds heard mingling with the mysterious murmurs of the sea, but the cry of the wheeling gull, the piping of a flock of sliver-winged tern, or the scream of the wild sea-mew.
Even in summer there are but few stragglers to disturb those endless forms of beauty which the moody waves, at every ebb, leave printed all over that grand expanse, in patterns ever new.
Such is little Norbreck as I have seen it in the glory of the year.
In winter, when the tear's whitewash upon its houses is getting a little weather-worn, it looks rather moulty and ragged to the eye; and it is more lonely and wild, simply because nature itself is so then; and Norbreck and nature are not very distant relations.
Chapter The Second.
The wave shall flow over this lilye lea And Penny Stone fearfu' flee: The Red Bank scar scud away dismayed, When Englond's in jeopardie.
Penny Stone: A Tradition Of The Fylde It was a bonny day in March 1860 when I reached Norbreck, just before those tides came on which had been foretold as higher than any for a century previous.
This announcement brought thousands of people from the interior into Blackpool and other places on that coast.
Many came expecting the streets to be invaded by the tide, and a great part of the level Fylde laid under water, with boats plying above the deluged fields, to rescue its inhabitants from the towers of churches and the tops of farm-houses.
Knowing as little of these things as inland people generally do, I had something of the same expectation; but when I came to the coast, and found people going quietly about their usual business, I thought that, somehow, I must be wrong.
It is true that one or two farmers had raised their stacks several feet, and another had sent his" deeds" to Preston, that they might be high and dry till the waters left his land again, and that certain old ladies who had been reading the newspapers, were a little troubled thereby; but, in the main, these seaside folk did n't seem afraid of the tide.
During the two days when the sea was to reach its height, Blackpool was as gay, and the weather almost as fine, as if it had been the month of June, instead of" March - mony weathers," as Fylde folk call it.
The promenade was lively with curious inlanders, who had left their" looms" at this unusual season, to see the wonders of the great deep.
But, when it came to pass that, because there was no wind to help in the water, the tide rose but higher than common, many people murmured thereat, and the town emptied as quickly as it had filled.
Not finding a deluge, they went landward again, with a painful impression that the whole thing was a hoax.
The sky was blue, the wind was still, and the sun was shining clearly; but this was not what they had come forth to see.
Though they were glad of any excuse for wandering again by the shore of the many - sounding ocean, and bathing soul and body in its renovating charms, the majority were sorely disappointed.
Among these, I met one old gentleman, close on seventy, who declared, in a burst of impassioned vernacular, that he would n't come to Blackpool again" for the next fifty year, sink or swim."
He said that he" wur gradely say-sick neaw, iv he never wur afore.
Thier great tide were nowt i' the but an arran' sell, getten up by lodgin' - heawse keepers, an' railway chaps, and sich like waistril devils, a-purpose to bring country folk to the wayter-side, an' pike brass eawt o' their pockets.
It were a lond tide at Blackpool folk were after; - an' they wanted to get it up' winter as weel as summer.
He could see through it weel enough.
But theyed done their do wi' him.
Heed to mich white in his even to be humbugged twice i' the same gate, or else heed worn his yed a greyt while to vast little end.
But heed come no moor a-seeing their tides, not nowt else, - naw, not if the whole hole were borne' t away, folk and o' - bigod!
He did n't blame the say so mich, - not he.
The say would behave itsel' reet enough, if a rock o' thieving would let it alone, an' not go an' belie it shamefully, just for the sheer lucre o' ill-gotten gain, an' nowt else.
** He coom fro Bowton, an' heere beawn back to Bowton by the next train; an' iv onybody ever seed him i' Blackpool again, they met tell him o n't at the time, an' heed ston a bottle o' wine for em', as ho they were.
They had a little saup o' wayter aside o' whoam, that oner' t for their bit so' jobs reet enough.
Itere nobbut a mak ov a bruck; but heed be content wi' it for the futur - tide or no tide.
They met tak' their say, and sup it, for him, trashy devils!
Bowton folk had brass enough to buy saunt an' wayter, an' make a say o' their own, beawt bein behowden to a rook o' mussel-catchers."
Of course, this was an extreme case, but there were many grumblers on the same ground, and some amusement arising out of their disappointment.
Down at Norbreck, about four miles north of Blackpool, though there was a little talk, here and there about the curious throng at the neighbouring watering-place, all else was still, as usual. "
Owd England", the quaint farmer and fisherman of the hamlet, knew these things well.
He had lived nearly seventy - four years on that part of the coast, and he still loved the great waters with the fervour of a sea-smitten lad.
From childhood he had been acquainted with the moods and tenses of the ocean; and it was a rare day that did n't see him hobble to" low water" for some purpose or other.
He explained to me that a tide of much lower register in the tables, if brought in by a strong wind, would be higher in fact than this one with an opposite wind; and he laughed at the fears of such as did n't know much about the matter. "
Thoose as are fleyed," said he," hed better go to bed i' boats, an' then they'll ston a chance o' wakkening aboon water i' the morning.
The idea of a whol teawn o' folk comming to' t seea for this.
Pshaw!
I've no patience wi'' em!
** Tide!
There'll be no tide warth speyking on, - silly divuls, - what I knaw.
I've seen a fifteen fuut tide come far higher nor this twenty - one foot eleven can come wi' the wind again it, - sewer, aw hev.
So fittin it should, too.
** But some folk knawn nowt o' the natur o' things."
Lame Billy Singleton, a weather-worn fisherman, better known by the name of" Peg Leg," sat knitting under the window, with his dim eyes bent over a broken net. "
Owd England" turned to him and said," it wur a fifteen fuut tide, Billy, at did o' that damage at Cleveless, where the bevel-men are at wark."
Old" Peg Leg" Lifted his head, and replied," Sewer, it wor, Thomas; an', by the hectum, that wor a tide.
If weed hed a strang sou' - west wind, this wad ha' played ricking too.
I've heard as there wor once a place, c' ad Singleton Thorpe, between Clevelass and Rossal, weshed away by a heigh tide, abaat three hundren year sing.
By the hectum, if that hed happen't i' these days, Thomas, here wod ha' bin some cheeop trips an' things stirring ower it."
He then went on mending his net.
Old bed-ridden Alice, who ahd spent most of the daylight stretched upon a couch under the window, said," but it never could touch us at Norbreck, - nowt o' t sooart.
Its nearly the heighest point i' t country; is n't it uncle?"
" Sartiny," said" Owd England;"" but," continued he," iv ye want to see summat warth remembering, ye mun go to low water.
It'll be a rare seet.
The seea'll ebb far nor ever were knawn i' the memory o' mon; an here'll be skeers an' rocks eawt as hesn't bin sin ov a hundred year.
Iv yeed like to set fuut o' greawnd at nobody living mun walk on again, go daan with us a five o'clock o' Friday afternoon."
I felt that this would indeed be an interesting sight, and I agreed to go with the old fisherman to low water.
It was a cloudless, summer-like evening, when our little company of four set out from Norbreck.
As we went down between the cliffs, the track of the declining sun's beams upon the sea was too glorious for eyes to endure, and every little pool and rill upon the sands gleamed like liquid gold.
A general hush pervaded the scene, and we could hear nothing but our own voices, and a subdued murmur of the distant waves, which made the prevailing silence more evident to the senses. "
Owd England" led the way, with his favourite staff in hand, and a basket on his arm for the collection of a kind of salt-water snail, called" whilks," which, he said, were" the finest heyting ov any sort o' fish i' the world for folk i' consumptions."
" Ye happen wodn't think it," said he," bod I wor i' danger o' consumption when I were a yong mon."
As we went on, now over a firm, swelling sand-bank; now stepping form stone to stone through a ragged" skeer," and slipping into pools and channels left by the tide, or wading the water in reckless glee - the fine old man kept steadily ahead, muttering his wayward fancies as he made towards the silver fringe that played upon the skirts of the sea.
Now and then he stopped to point out the rocks, and tell their names. "
That's the' Carling an' Cowt,' - a common seet enough.
Ye see, it's noan so far eawt.
** Yon's' The Mussel Rock,' deawn to so' thard.
There's folk musseling on it neaw, I believe.
But ween that way on.
Tak raand bith sond-bank theer.
Yaar noan shod for wading; an' this skeer's a varra rough un.
** That's' Penny Stone,' reight afore you, toward the seea.
Ye'll have heard o'' The Penny Stone Rock,' mony a time, aw warnd.
There wor once a public-heawse where it stons; and they sowd ale there, at a penny a pot.
Bod then one connot tell whether it wor dear or cheeop till they knaw whot size the pot wor - an' that I dunnot knaw.
Mr. Thornber, o' Blackpool, hes written a book abaat this' Penny Stone;' an' I believe that Mr. Wood, o' Bispham Schoo', hes one.
He'll land it yo in a minute, aw warnd.
Ye mun send little Tom wi' a bit ov a note.
I never see' Penny Stone' eawt so as to get raand it afore.
** Neaw, yon far' est, near low watter, is' The Owd Woman's Heyd.'
I've oft heeard on it, an' sometimes sin a bit o' t tip aboon the water, bod I never see it dry i' my life afore, - an' I never mun again, - never."
He then plodded on, filling his basket, and muttering to himself about this extraordinary ebb, and about the shortness of human life.
The sun began to" steep his glowing axle in the western wave," and the scene was melting every moment into a new tone of grandeur.
As we neared the water, the skeers became more rugged and wet, and, in a few minutes, we picked up a basketful of" whilks," and a beautiful variety of the sea anemone.
After the sun had dipped, his lingering glory still crowded the western heavens, and seemed to deepen in splendour as it dies upon the scene; while the golden ripples of the sea sang daylight down to rest.
I never saw mild evening close over the world with such dreamy magnificence.
We wandered by the water till " Golden Hesperus was mounted high in top of heaven sheen, And warned his other brethren joyeous To light their blessed lamps in Jove's eternal house."
The tide was returning, and the air getting cold; so we went homewards, with wandering steps, in the wake of our old fisherman, by way of" Penny Stone Rock."
There is a tradition all over the Fylde, that this rock, now only visible" on the utmost verge of the retired wave," marks the locality of a once famous hostelry.
Doubtless the tradition has some foundation in fact, as the encroachments of the sea upon this coast have been great, and sometimes disastrous, as in the destruction of the village of Singleton Thorpe, about a mile and a half to northward, in 1555.
In the Rev.
W. Thornber's interesting little volume, called" Penny Stone; or a Tradition of the Spanish Armada," he says of the old hostelry associated with this now submerged rock," it was situated in a vale, protected form the sea by a barrier of sand-hills, at a short distance from a village called Singleton Thorpe, in the foreland of the Fylde, Lancashire.
The site of the homestead was romantic, for it was in the very centre of a Druidical circle, described in a former tradition of the country, on of the huge stones of which reared its mis-shapen block near the porch.
Into this stone a ring had been inserted by the thrifty Jock, its host, to which he was wont to attach the horses of his customers whilst they regaled themselves with a penny pot of his far-farmed ale.
Hither the whole country resorted on holidays to spend them in athletic games, and the quaff the beloved beverage.
; nay, so renowned was the hostel, that' merrie days of hie away to Penny Stone' was common even to a proverb.
Here lay the secret enchantment of its popularity.
The old distich tells us that - " Hops, reformation, bays, and beer, Came into England all in a year. "
Ale was a beverage which had been well known in England, but in the reign of Henry Viii.
it assumed a new name from the infusion of hops.
Now, Jocks father, a cunning lout, was the first to commence in the Fylde this new, and at that time mysterious system of brewing, which so pleased the palate of his customers, that while others sold their insipid malt liquor at two - pence per gallon he vended his ale at a penny per pot.
Hence his hostel became known by the name of the Penny Stone, the resort of revellers form far and near, notwithstanding the character os its owner was branded with the stigma of being a wizard, a dealer in spells and medicaments so powerful and enticing that a draft of his foaming stoop always created a longing and a thirst after more.
Jock, with the hostel, inherited his father's receipt and character; by the former he took care to profit, and the other, as yet, had not been injurious either to his prosperity or his peace.
His popularity as a good-hearted fellow had well nigh obliterated all remembrance of his wizardship, except when it was renewed by an irritated drunkard's threat, or on a stormy night, when some old crone terrified noisy youngsters into silence by telling them that Jock's familiar was abroad on his way to the brewing at the hostel."
" The spot where Penny Stone stood was a rural retreat, not devoid of beauty, though age and storms had destroyed most of the groves of oak trees which once flourished there; and though the few that protracted their existence on the margin of a sluggish brook that meandered through the vale were deprived of their former luxuriance by the blighting violence of the western winds.
The neatness of Jock was conspicuous around his homestead.
There was an exterior appearance of comfort, plainly manifesting that its owner was well to do in the world.
The garden in front was laid out after the prim formal fashion of the age, while it was well stored with radishes, skirrets, parsnips, carrots, cabbages, turnips and salad herb, which were then in use among the poor.
The porch was clothed with creepers and ivy, the thatch of the roof in good repair, and the narrow lights were of different dates, some of them being latticed with rifts of oak, others having horn set in in calmes, and a few glazed with glass.
The interior also betokened the presence of a thrifty house-wife.
It consisted of a thorough lobby, a hall precisely like the hull of a ship inverted, being supported on crooks, low dark, and picturesque, with a parlour beyond it on one side, and the kitchens and offices, etc., on the other.
The windows were apertures, not originally intended for glass; the floors of clay, and the partitions of rudely carved oak.
The furniture shone brightly: there was the massy long table, the carved" armary," the dated court-cupboard, and logs, benches, and three - legged stools in plenty.
The smoky rafters( the hungry traveller might turn his eyes towards them with delight) were laden with dried beef, bacon, and fish; and the great" kist" in the corner was rammed with oatmeal for the consumption of the family."
Such is the embodiment Mr. Thornber has given to the common tradition of" Penny Stone," which rock we were now approaching on our homeward way.
A we drew near it, we saw five persons come over the shining sands towards the same spot; and we heard merry voices ringing in the evening air.
I first made out my friend Alston, of Bispham, in his strong shooting-dress of light-coloured tweed, and attended by two favourite terriers," Wasp" and" Snap."
We met at the rock, and I found my friend accompanied by three" brethren of the mystic tie," one of whom was Mr. Thornber - the veritable chronicler of" Penny Stone."
The latter had wandered thus far to avail himself of this rare chance of climbing his pet legendary crag.
His hands were full of botanical specimens from the sea, and, in his fervid way, he discoursed upon them, and upon the geology of the coast, in a manner which, I am sorry to say, was almost lost to my uninitiated mind.
I took the opportunity of inquiring where he found the materials for his tradition.
He answered that there was no doubt of its fundamental truth;" but, as to the details wrought into the story," said he, pointing to his forehead, with a laugh," I found them in a cellar, in the rock there."
The gloomy mass was surrounded by a little moat of salt water, nearly knee deep, through which we passed; and then, clinging to its Triton locks of seaweed, we climbed the slippery peaks of" Penny Stone."
The stout lad in attendence drew a bottle from his basket; and each in his way celebrated this unexpected meeting in that singular spot, where we should never meet together again.
I shall never forget the sombre splendour of the scene, nor the striking appearance of the group upon that lonely rock, where the rearward hues of the day were yielding their room to" sad succeeding night."
We lingered there awhile; but the air was cold, and the sea began to claim its own again.
Four then returned by the cliffs to Blackpool, and the rest crossed the sands hastily to Norbreck, where, after an hours chat by the old fisherman's great kitchen fire, I crept to bed, with the sound of the sea in my ears.
Chapter The Third.
A very good piece of work, I assure you, and a merry.
Now, good Peter Quince, call forth your actors by the scroll; masters, spread yourselves.
Midsummer Night's Dream.
The" million - fingered" rain was tapping at the kitchen window as I sat by" Owd Englands" bright hearthstone one forenoon, hearkening to the wind, that moaned outside like a thing in pain.
I could hear by a subdued thump, that" Lizzy" was churning in the dairy; and I knew by the smell of fresh bread, which came from a spacious out-kitchen, that" Granny" was baking. "
Little Tom," the cow lad, had started early with the cart to Poulton for coals, making knots on his whip lash as he went along, to help his memory, which was crowded with orders to call at one place for meal, at another for mutton, and at others for physic, and snuff, and such like oddments, wanted by the neighbours. "
Owd England" had gone to the seaside, with his staff and his leather strap, to fetch the daily" burn" of firewood, and - to see what he could see; for every tide brought something.
One day he hauled a barrel of Stockholm tar from the water; on another, part of the cabin furniture of an unfortunate steamer; and then a great baulk of pine was thrown ashore; in all of which the old man had a certain interest as" wreck - master."
" Peg Leg" the fisherman, was mending a net; and lame Alice lay, as usual, wrapped up in shadow, on the couch under the window, with her pale face, and a nose" as sharp as a pen," turned to the ceiling; while Tib, with her soft legs folded under, lay basking luxuriously in the fire-shine, dreaming of milk and of mice.
The old clock ticked audibly in the corner, and a pin-drop silence prevailed in the room. "
Thats a fine cat," said I."
Aye," replied old Alice," is n't it a varra fine cat?
It's mother to that as Missis Alston hes.
It cam fra Lunnon, an' it's worth a deeal o' money, is that cat.
The varra day as you cam, it weshed it face an' sneez' t twice - it dud, for sewer.
Missis Eastwood wor getting dinner ready at the time, an' hoo said,' We hev a stranger fra some quarter this day, mind i' we hevn't;' an' directly after, yo cam walking into the heawse, I tell yo, just as nowt were.
I offens think it's queer; bod i've sin cats as good as any almanac for telling weather, an' sich like."
" Will it scrat," said I, stroking" Tib" as she streched and yawned in my face. "
Well," replied Alice," it's like everything else for that; it just depends what ye do at it.
Bod, I can onser for one thing - it'll not scrat as ill as' The Red Cat' at Bispham does.
I hev sin folk a bit mauled after playing wi' that."
" Aye, an' so hev I, too," said old" Peg Leg."
" I caed theer tother neet, an', by the hectum, heaw they wor gooing on, to be sewer.
I crope into a corner wi' my gill, there wor such lilting agate; an', ye knaw, a mon wi' one leg made o' wood and tother full o' rheumatic pains is nowt mich at it.
Beside, I've ten a liking to quietness, - one does, ye knaw, Alce, as they getten owd.
I geet aside of a mon as were tellin abeawt Jem Duck' orth o' Preston, selling his midden.
Ye'll hev heeard o' that, Alice?"
" Nay, I do n't know as I hev, Billy; what is' t?
I dud hear at once the baillies were in his heawse, an' they agreed to go away if heed find' em a bondsman.
So Jem towd em' that he hed a respectable owd friend i' the next room that he thowt would be bund wi' him to ony amount, if theyed let him fotch him.
So they towd him to bring his bond in at once, an' hev it sattle' t baat ony bother - for the ballies were friends o' Jems, ye knaw; an' they did n't want to be hard with him.
Well, what does Jem do, bod go an' fotch a great brown bear, as heed mony a year, an' turns it into the place where the baillies were, baat muzzle; and says,' Gentlemen, that theer's him!'
Bod, never ye mind if the baillies did n't go through that window, moor sharper.
** I've heard many a quare tale o' Jem.
What's this abaat the midden, Billy?"
" Well, ye knaw, Jem wor a good tempered sort ov a mon, but full o' strange marlocks.
He wor varra strong, an' a noted feighter; - the cock o' the clod in his day, for that.
An' he kept a deeal o' horses that he leet aat for hire.
Well, heed once gether' t a good midden together fra' the stables, an' farmers began o' commin abaat the yard to look at it; so, one on' em says,' Jem, what'll to take for the midden?'
' Five paand,' says Jem. '
Well, I'll gi' tho five paand,' says the farmer.
So he ped him, an' said heed send the carts in a day or two.
In a bit, another comes, an' axes the proce o' the midden.
Jem stack to the owd tale, an' said' five paand, and cheeop too;' an' the farmer gev him the brass at once. '
Sowd again,' says Jem,' an' the money drawn.'
Well, at the end ov o', it happen't at both sets o' carts cam for the midden o' the same day, an' there were the devil's delight agate i' the yard between' em.
At last, they agreed to send for Jem; so he cam wi' a face as innocent as a flea, an' pretended to want to know whatever there were to do. '
Did n't I buy this midden, Jem?'
said one. '
Yigh, sure, thae did,' says Jem. '
Well, an' did n't I pay tho for' t at the same time?'
' Sure thae did, owd lad - reet enough,' says Jem,' whatever's o' this hullabaloo abeawt?'
' Well, but,' says tother,' Did n't I buy it on tho?'
' Yigh, thae did,' says Jem,' an' thae ped me for' t, too, honourably, like a mon, - an' I'll take varra good care as nob' dy but yo two hes it.'
That wer awkert, ye knaw; an' I cannot tell heaw theyed end it, - for Jem wor bad to manage.
They were telling it at the' Red Cat' t' other neet, bod I could hardly yer for the gam at wor afoot.
Lor bless you!
There wor a gentleman fra Fleetwood trying to donce i' the middle o' the floor: an' owd Jack Backh' us stood i' one corner, wi' his yure ower his face, staring like wild, an' reciting abaat the Battle o' Waterloo.
These chaps sit uppo the sofa as hed been ower Wyer o' day, an' theyed etten so mich snig-pie at the' Shard,' that it hed made em' say-sick, so Tom Poole were mixing' em stuff to cure it.
Another were seawnd asleep on a cheer, an' little' Twinkle,' fra Poulton, doncing abeawt challenging him to feight.
An it wor welly as bad eawtside, for there wer a oppen trap coom up wi' a lot o' trippers as hed bin to Cleveless, an'' Bugle Bob' uppo the box, playin' Rule Brittannia.'
Bod I laft when the bevel man fra' Rossall began' o' coming in, singing' Said Dick unto Tom,' for I felt my yed giving way under it."
The song," Said Dick unto Tom," alluded to by the old man, is a rude fishing ditty, never printed before, and hardly known out of the Fylde, to which it relates.
I wrote it down from the recitation of a friend near Norbreck.
There is not much in the words except a quiet, natural tone, with one or two graphic strokes, which breathe the spirit of the country it belong to.
The tune is a very quaint one, which I never heard before the time when I obtained the words.
The song was written some time ago, by William Garlick, a very poor man, and a weaver of" pow-davy," a kind of sail cloth.
These are the words: - Said dick unto Tom, one Friday at noon, Loddle Iddle, fol de diddle ido; Said Dick unto Tom, one Friday at noon, Aw could like to go a-bobbing i' the morning varra soon.
To my heighho, wi' my bob-rods an' o'; Loddle iddle, fol de diddle ido.
Then up i' the morning Dick dud rise, Loddle iddle, etc.
; Then up i' the morning Dick dud rise, An' to Tom's door like leetning flies.
To my heighho, wi' my worm-can an' o'; Loddle iddle, etc.
So, up Tom jumped an' deawn the stairs dart, Loddle iddle etc.
; So, up Tom jumped an' deawn the stairs dart, To go a-getting dew-worms afor they start.
Wi' my heighho, an' my worm-can an' o'; Loddle iddle, etc.
Then they hunted, an' rooted, an' seeched abaat Loddle iddle etc.
; Then they hunted, an' rooted, an' seeched abaat Egad, says little Tom, there's noan so mony aat, To my heighho, wi' my worm-can an' o'; Loddle iddle, etc.
So, off they set wi' the bob-rods i' hond, Loddle iddle etc.
; So, off they set wi' the bob-rods i' hond, Like justices o' pace, or governore o' lond To my heighho, wi' my snig-bags an' o'; Loddle iddle etc.
An' when they gat to Kellamoor, that little country place, Loddle Iddle etc.
An' when they gat to Kellamoor, that little country place, The childer were so freeten't' at they dorsn't shew thier face.
To my heighho, wi' my bob-rods an' o'; Loddle iddle, etc.
An' when they gat to Bryning, folk thought thereed bin a mob, Loddle iddle, etc.
An' when they gat to Bryning, folk thought thereed bin a mob, Till little Tom persuaded' em they wor bod baan to bob.
To my heighho, wi thier sing-bags an' o'; Loddle iddle, etc.
An' when they gad to Warton, they wor afore the tide, Loddle iddle, etc.
An' when they gad to Warton, they wor afore the tide, They jumped into a boat, an' away they both did ride.
To my heighho, wi' thier bob-rods an' o'.
Loddle iddle, etc.Soon after dinner the clouds broke, and it was fine again.
I went to the seaside; and, after pacing to and fro by the waves awhile, I struck out toward Rossall, through the wandering byepaths of a wilderness of sand and tall grass, called" Star Hills," upon the edge of the cliffs.
I had scarcely gone a mile before" rattling showers drave on the blast" again, and the sky was all thick gloom.
Dripping wet, I hurried towards the old hotel at Cleveless, and, darting in, got planted in a snug arm-chair by the parlour fire, watching the storm that swept furiously aslant the window, and splashed upon the road in front.
Three other persons were in the room, one a workman from Rossall College, hard by, and other commercial men on their route to Fleetwood.
It is wonderful how much rough weather enhances the beauty of the inside of a house. "
Better a wee bush than nae bield."
Well, we were just getting into talk when the door opened, and a humorous face looked in.
It was a bright-eyed, middle-aged man, shining all over with wet; a blue woolen apron was twisted around his waist, and he had a basket on his arm..
Leaning against one door-cheek, and sticking a knife into another, he said" by gobs, did n't I get a fine pelting out o' that!
** Do yees want any oysters, gentlemen?
The shells is small," sad he, stepping forward," but theyere chock full o' the finest fish in the world.
Divul a aiqual thim oysters has in the say, for flavour; mind I'm telling ye** Taste that!"
-" Hollo, Dennis!"
said one of the company," how is it you are n't in Fleetwood?"
-" Well, because I'm here, I suppose," said Dennis. "
Bedad, ye ca n't expect a man to be in two places at once - barring he was a burd.
Maybe it's good fortune sent me here to meet wid a few daycent customers.
Sorra one I met an the way, but rain powring down in lashins till the oyster in my basket begun to think they were in the say agin."
-" Well, Dennis," said the traveller," I'll have a score if you'll tell us about the Irishman in the cook's shop."
" Ye will?
Then divul recave the toe I stir till ye get both!
** Will you take another score, sir, till tell the tale?
Its little chance ye'll have o' meeting them oysters agin - for theyere getting scarce.
Oh, mothering forting," contnued he, putting down the basket," how that villain torments my poor bones this day!
Many a time I was nigh chuckun it over the hedge, an sitting down on a shtone to shtarve right out, for its better to die aisy an' idle, than to be slaving to death for nothun.
** Begorra, see, there's a splendid oyster!
That fellow's a mouthful for a king!
** If it was n't for the fun an' the comfort there is in meeting wud rale gintlemin sometimes, Ied loose heart entirely.
Things is quarely divided in this world.
** How An' - ever, since its no better, than God it's no worse.
** If I could meet wid a customer to buy the stock, an' the basket, an' the knife, at cost price, - Ied give him the goodwill an' the run o' the country for a pint o' porter, an' then Ied hurry to the nearest barracks, an' change my clothes.
** But, - now for the tale," said he, with his knife and his tongue in motion together. "
It was a man from Nenagh, in Tipperary - a kind o' ganger an the railway; an' he wint to a cook-shop in a teawn not far from this, an', ses he to the missis o' the heawse,' A basin o' pay-soop, ma' am, plaze,' - for, mind ye, an Irishman's naterally polite till he's vext, an' thin he's as fiery as Julius Sayzur.
Well, whin she brought to soop, Paddy tuk a taste mighty sly; an' turning reawnt, ses he - just for spooart, mind - ses he,' Bedad, ma' am, your soop tastes mighty strong o' the water.'
Well, av coorse, the woman was vext all out, an' she up an' tould him he did n't understand good aiting an' drinking, an' he might lave the soop for thim that had bin better eddicated.
But bowld Paddy wint on widout losing a stroke o' the spoon; an' - purtinding not to hear her - ses he,' I'll go bail I'll make as good broth as thim wud a penny candle an' a trifle o' pepper.'
Well, by gobs, this riz the poor woman's dander to thefull hoight, an she made right at him wid her fist, an' swore sheed knock him into the boiler.
But Paddy was nigh finishing his soup, an' he made up his mind to take the last word: an' ses he,' Bi the powers!
that'll be the best bit o' mate ever went into your pan, ma' am;' an' wi that, he burst into a laugh, an' the philandering rogue up an' towld her how he said it all for divarshun; an' divul a better soop he tasted in his life.
Well, she changed her tune, like a child.
By dad, it was like playing a piano or a flute, or something.
An', mind ye, there's nothing like an Irishman for getting the right music out ov a woman - all the world over.
So my tale's ended, an' Ied like to see the bottom o' my basket.
Ye may as well brake me, gintlemen.
There's not more nor five score.
Take the lot, an' let me go home; for I've a long step to the fore, an' I'm wet to the bone, an' the roads is bad after dark."
Chapter The Fourth.
Still Lingering in the quiet paths.
All The Year Round.
After a good deal of pleasantry, Dennis got rid of his oysters in the hotel at Cleveless; and, as the storm was still raging without, he called for a glass, just, as he said," to keep the damp away from the spark in his heart; more by token that he had no other fire to dry his clothes at.
But, begorra, for the matter o' that," said he" theyere not worth a grate-full o' coals.
Look at my trowsers.
Theyere on the varge o' super-annuation; an' they'll require a substitute before long, or else, I'm thinking, they'll not combine daycently.
How An' - ever, gentlemen," continued he," here's hoping the fruition ov your purses may bever fail ye, nor health to consign ther contents to utility.
Aneneaw," said he, lighting his pipe, and putting the empty basket on his head like a cowl," I must go, iv the rain comes in pailfuls, for I'm not over well; and if I could get home wud wishing Ied be in bed by the time yeed say' trap-sticks!'
But draming and schamin's neither riding nor flying, so I'll be tramping, for there's no more use in wishing that there would be in a doctor feeling a man's pulse through the hole in the wall wid the end ov a kitchen poker.
Aneneaw, I'll be proud iv any gintleman would oblige me by coming a couple o' mile an the road; to see the way I'll spin over the greawnd.
** Yeed rather not?
Well, fun an' fine weather's not always together, so good bye, an' long life to ye!
an' here's wishing that your appetites an' your mate may be close companions an' good frinds; an' that yees may never die in child-bed!"
and so, away went Dennis through the rain towards Fleetwood.
Waiting for the shower to abate, I sat awhile; and, as one of the company had been to a funeral, it ked to a conversation about benefit societies; in relation to which, one person said he objected to funeral benefits being allowed to people who had died by their own hand; because it would encourage others to commit suicide also.
A little stiff fellow in the corner told an anecdote about a country man who, on returning from the burial of one of his acquaintances, said he should n't like to go to another funeral," becose it wer sich a malancholy spree; an' they sang sich soort tunes' at he could n't help crying."
From this we glided to the subject of consecrated ground; and a question arose respecting a man who had been accidentally buried partly in consecrated ground and partly in unconsecrated ground, - as to what result would ensue from that mistake to the poor corpse in the end of all.
The doubt was as to whose influence the unconsecrated half came under.
The dispute ran high, without anybody making the subject clearer, so I came away before the shower was over.
Next day I went to Blackpool; and, while awaiting at the station the arrival of a friend of mine, I recognized the face of an old woman whom I had known in better days.
Tall and thin, with a head as white as a moss-crop, she was still active, and remarkably clean and neat in appearance.
Her countenance, though naturally melancholy, had a spice of the shrew in it. "
Eh," said she," I'm glad to see you.
Its not oft I have a chance of meeting and old face now, for I'm seldom out."
She then told me she had been two years and a half housekeeper to a decrepid old gentleman and his two maiden sisters, in a neighbouring town. "
But," said she," I'm going to leave.
You see I've got into years; and, though I'm active, thank God, yet I'm often ill; and people do n't like to be troubled with servants that are ill, you know.
So, I'm forced to work on, ill or well; for I'm but a lone woman, with no friends to help me, but my son, and he's been a long time in Canada, and I have n't heard from him this three years.
I look out for the postman day by day, - but nothing comes.
Sometimes I think he's dead.
But the Lord knows.
It's like to trouble one, youere sure.
It's hard work, with one thing and another, very; for I have to' scrat before I can peck,' as the saying is, and shall to the end o' my day now.
But, if you can hear of anything likely, I wish you would let me know, - for leave yonder I will.
I would n't stop if theyed hang my hair wi' diamonds, - I would n't indeed.
I've said it, an' signed it - so there's an end.
But what, they'll never ask me to stop, I doubt.
It's very hard.
You see I have to keep my son's little boy in a neighbour's house, - this is him, - an' that eats up nearly all my bit o' wage, - and where's my clothing to come from?
But, do n't yo see, our people are greedy to a degree.
Lord bless you!
Theyed skin three devils for one hide, - they would for sure.
See yo; one day -( here she whispered something which I did n't exactly catch) - they did indeed!
As missis Dixon said, when I met her i' Friargate, on Monday forenoon,' It was a nasty, dirty trick!'
But I've had my fill, an' I shall sing' Oh be joyful' when my time's up.
I shall be glad to get to my own country again, - yes, if I have to beg my bread.
See; theyere actually afraid of me going out o' the house for fear I should talk about' em to the neighbours.
Bless you, they judge everybody by theirselves.
But I' scorn the action!
It is just as Missis Smith said,' Theyere frightened o' the world being done before they've done wi' the world,' - they are for sure.
Such griping grinding ways!
They'll never prosper, - never."
" And this is your grandson?"
said I."
Yes, an' he's a wonderful child for his age.
He's such a memory!
His father was just same.
I often think heed made a rare' torney, he remembers things so, and he's such queer sayings.
I've taught him many a piece off by heart.
Come, George, say that little piece for this gentleman.
Take your fingers out of your mouth.
Come now."
The lad looked a minute, and then rattled out: - " Said Aaron to Moses, aw'll swap though noses;" " Oh, for shame," said she," not that."
But he went on, " Said Moses to Aaron, thine's sich a quare un."
" For shame!"
said she. "
You see they teach him all sorts o' nonsense; and he remembers everything.
Come, be quick;" Twinkle, twinkle."
But here the train was ready; and, in five minutes more, she was on her way to Preston; and, not finding my friend, I walked back by the cliffs.
In my rambles about Norbreck I met with many racy characters standing in relief among their neighbours, and marked with local peculiarities as distinctly as anything that grows from the soil.
In a crowded city they might be unnoticed; but, amid" the hamlet's hawthorn wild," where existence seems to glide as noiselessly as a cloud upon a summer sky, save where friendly gossips meet like a choir of crickets by some country fire, they are threads of vivid interest woven into the quiet tale of life; and, among their own folk they are prized something like those old books which people hand from generation to generation, - because they bear the quaint inscriptions of their forefathers.
In my wandering I had also the benefit of a genial and intelligent companion; and whether we were under his own roof, among books and flowers, and fireside talk about the world in the distance, or roving the green lanes and coppice-trods, chatting with stray villagers by the way, or airing ourselves in the wind," on the beached margent of the sea," I found great pleasure and assistance in his society.
My friend lives about a mile down the winding road from Norbreck, in a substantial hall, bult about a hundred years ago, a pleasantly dropt at the foot of a great natural embankment, which divides the low-lying plain from the sea.
The house stands among slips of orderly garden, and plantation, with poultry yards and out-houses at the north-east end.
The front of the house if flanked by two little groves of trees, and a tasteful, well-tended flower-garden slopes softly down to the iron railings which divide the garden from a great level field, across which a broad green walk leads to the gates at the highway side.
The road is just far enough removed from the house to conceal the features of any passer by, and yet near enough for any familiar gait or figure to be discernible from the windows.
From this road the sound of the postman's horn comes cheerily every forenoon, except on Sundays; and in summer, vehicles laden with visitors from Blackpool roll lazily along through the sunshine, on their way to Cleveless, Rossall, or Fleetwood.
The green country, sparely sprinkled with white farm-houses and cottages, spreads out in front, far and wide, to where the fells of Lancashire bound the eastward view.
The scene is as quiet as a country church just before service begins, except where the sails of a windmill are whirling in the wind, or the fleecy steam-cloud of a distant train gushes across the landscape, like a flying fountain of snow.
On a knoll behind the house there is a little rich orchard, trimly hemmed in by thick thorn hedges.
I have seen it when its shadeless walks were open to the sky, and all its holiday glory was brooding patiently down in the cold ground; but I remember how oft in summer, when the boughs were bending with fruit, and the leaves were so thick overhead that the sunshine could only find its way through chinks of the green ceiling, we have pushed the branches aside, and walked and talked among its bowery shades; or sitting on benches at the edge of the fish-pond, have read and watched our floats, and hearkened to the birds, until we have risen, as if drawn by some fascination in the air, and gone unconsciously towards the sea again.
There we have spent many a glorious hour; and there, at certain times of the day we should meet with" Quick."
or" Mitch," or some other coast-guardsman belonging to the gun-boat's crew at Fleetwood, pacing to and fro, on the look-out for Frenchmen, smugglers, and wreck.
As we returned from the shore one afternoon, an old man was walking on the road before us, carrying what looked in the distance like two milk pails.
These he set down now and then, and looked quietly around.
My friend told me that this part of the Fylde was famous for singing birds, especially larks.
He said that bird-catchers came from all parts of Lancashire, particularly Manchester, to ply their craft there; and he would venture a guess that the quaint figure before us was a Manchester bird-catcher, though it was rather early in the season.
When we overtook the old man, who had set down his covered cages in a bye-lane, we found that he was a bird-catcher, and from Manchester too.
I learnt, also, that it was not uncommon for a clever catcher to make a pound a day by his" calling."
Our rambles sometimes took us by the farmstead of John Whiteside, a man well know and respected in that part.
A romantic thing lately befell this old Fylde farmer.
It seems that about sixteen years before the time of my last visit to Norbreck, he found a man lying in the" Star Hills," or sandy cliffs, close to the shore, nearly naked, and almost dead with hunger and cold.
Now, he had compassion on him, and took him to his own house, and had him nursed there, until he recovered strength.
The man was a painter, and he remained there, painting the carts and other things, and working in the hay.
The farmer took a liking to him, and paid him well for his labour, and thus enabled him to clothe himself, and send money to his family.
At the end of six weeks, he said that he must depart; but, if ever he was able to reward the farmer for his kindness, he would do so.
He then went his way, and in a little while was forgotten.
now, when sixteen years had passed away, without any tidings of the man, a stranger came up to the farmer's door, saying that the once destitute painter was now dead.
He then produced a duly-attested copy of his will, in which he had bequeathed to the farmer land and other property, to the value of sixteen hundred pounds, in return for the kindness shewn to him sixteen years before.
The primitive little parish church of Bispham was always an interesting object to me.
It stands on a knoll, about a quarter of a mile over the fields from Norbreck; and its foundation is of great antiquity.
It appears that the Roman Catholic form of worship was celebrated in this church until the ascension of Elizabeth to the throne.
Speaking of the time of the Reformation, the following passage occurs in Mr. Thornber's" Penny Stone; or, a Tradition of the Spanish Armada;" -" Lancashire at this period was particularly torn by adverse parties; for while in other parts of the kingdom the new religion progressed rapidly, there it was retrograde; Romanists multiplied, the mass was commonly performed, priests were harboured, many churches shut up, and the cures unsupplied, except by the rejected.
In the Foreland of the Fylde, local circumstances had increased the dissatisfaction, which had been chiefly excited by the dissemination of the infamous publications of Dr. Allen, a native of Rossall - the preaching of Campain and others, while in hiding at the Heskets' of the Maynes, Poulton, and at the Rigby's of Layton Hall - by the unjust election of Widow Allen and her daughter from Rossall Grange, before the expiration of their lease - its plunder and sacking - the constant repetition of acts of oppression - and finally, by the deprivation of Jeromine Allen, the respected cure of Bispham church, who from the smallness of his cure, and the insignificance of its yearly value, was probably screened from the notice of the reformers."
The last time this Jeromine Allen officiated in Bispham church was on the 25th of March 1559.
After the celebration of the mass, the old priest preached form the text" Obey the powers that be, for they are ordained of God;" and then, taking a solemn farewell of his congregation, he departed, to spend the remainder of his days at Lambspring, in Germany.
The grave-yard at Bispham church contains some interesting memorials, but none more solemnly eloquent than a certain row of green mounds covering the remains of the unknown drowned washed upon that coast from time to time.
Several of these, which drifted ashore after the burning of the Ocean Monarch off the coast of Wales, in 1848, now lie mouldering together in the quiet country churchyard, all unknown, save a lady from Bury, in Lancashire, to whose memory a tombstone is erected here.
As the great tides declined, the weather began to be troubled with wintry fits, but when the day of my return came it brought summer again.
After dinner at Bispham House, I went up with my friend to bid farewell to" Owd England" at Norbreck; and it was like parting with some quaint volume of forgotten lore.
Nursed here in the lap of nature, the people and customs of the country were part of himself; and his native landscape, with all the shifting elements in the scene, was a kind of barometer, the slightest changes of which were intelligible to him.
At the eastern edge of Norbreck, a low wall of coble stones encloses his garden.
Here, where I have sometimes made a little havoc among his" Bergamots,"" Old Keswicks," and" Scotch Bridgets," we walked about, whilst I took a parting look at the landscape.
Immediately behind us the sea was singing its old sone; and below lay the little rural parish," where," as I heard the rector say in one of his sermons," a man cannot walk into the open air but all his neighbours can see him."
Beyond, the tranquil Fylde stretches out its drowsy green, now oblivious of all remembrance of piratical ravage, which so often swept over it in ancient times.
Yonder the shipping of Fleetwood is clearly in sight to the north.
And there, a sunbean, stealing between the fleecy clouds, glides across the land from field to field, with a kind of plaintive grace, as if looking for a lost garden.
Over meadow, over wood and little town it goes, dying away upon yon rolling hills in the east.
The first of these hills is Longridge, and behind it, weird old Pendle, standing in a world of its own, is dimly visible.
Northward, the hills roll on in bold relief, Parlick, and Bleasdale, and the fells between Morecambe and" time-honoured Lancaster."
Still northward, to where yon proud brotherhood of snow-crowned giants, the mountains of Cumberland and Westmorland, look so glorious in the sunlight; awaking enchanting dreams of that land of romance, the" Lake District," hallowed by so many rich associations of genius.
They toss their mighty heads on westward, till solemn old" Black Coomb" dips into the Irish Sea.
Altogether a fine setting for the peaceful scene below.
The afternoon was waning, so, taking leave of the old fisherman and his household, I turned from Norbreck like a man who rises from his dinner before he is half satisfied.
Accompanied by my friend, I walked four miles, on highways and bye-ways, to meet the train at Poulton.
The road was pleasant, and the day was fine; and I reached Manchester before midnight, feeling better in soul and body for my sojourn at this little hamlet down by the western sea.
Over The Sands To The Lakes.
Chapter The First.
From Silverdale to Kent sand side, Whose soil is sown with cockle shells; From Cartmel eke, and Connyside, With fellows fierce from Furness fells.
Lancashire Ballad Of Flooden Field Morecambe bay, or, the great crooked bay, which divides the districts of Furness and Cartmel from the rest of Lancashire, and which receives the waters of the Wyre, the Lune, the Keer, the Winster, the Kent, the Leven, and other rivers of less note, is a grand object, lying among scenes of singular interest and beauty.
Its picturesquely-irregular shores are full of varied charm = soft secluded vales, and green nooks of nestling - old towns and villages, rich parks, and wild woods sloping to the water - which are all the more charming that they cling like a garland about this playground of the capricious sea, with the outlines of the mountains crowding round in the rearward, tier over tier, in stormy majesty.
Within the fine sweep of scenery overlooking this bay, there is many a venerable home of ancient religion, many a towered steep and storied glen, that wakes the memories of a thousand years gone by.
Morecambe is, also, the outfall of Windermere and Coniston waters, and is the most impressive gateway to the Lake Country.
From its shore at Ulverstone, the River Leven will lead the traveller by windings full of changeful beauty, nine miles, to that pleasant resting place called" Newby Bridge," at the foot of Windermere.
Cartmel and Furness have been comparatively unknown, on account of difficulty of access in days gone by; but now that the line from Lancaster to Ulverstone skirts these sequestered regions, their attractions cannot fail to arrest the attention of all lovers of the picturesque in nature.
In addition to its natural beauty, Furness is indeed" a land whose stones are iron, and out of whose hills thou mayst dig brass;" but the wild fells and green valleys of Cartmel know little of the bustling world, save what belongs to their purely agricultural and pastoral character; and the primitive mountain folk therein cling to the manners, language, and traditions of their" fore-elders" with an affection little disturbed by communion with the great changes of modern life.
To the scholar and student of manners, to the lover of nature, and the man of science, these secluded hills and glens teem with rich and rare interest.
Before the railway was made, the old way of crossing the sand from Lancaster to Ulverstone must have been very striking, both from the character of the scenery around, and a sense of danger, which cannot but have given something of the piquancy of adventure to the journey.
The channels are constantly shifting, particularly after heavy rains, when they are perilously uncertain.
For many centuries past, two guides have conducted travellers over them.
Their duty is to observe the changes, and find fordable points.
In all seasons and states of the weather this was their duty, and in times of storm and fog it must have been fraught with danger.
These guides were anciently appointed by the prior of Cartmel, and received synodal and Peterpence for their maintenance.
They are now paid from the revenues of the duchy.
The office of guide has been so long held by a family of the name of Carter, that the country people have given that name to the office itself.
A gentleman, crossing from Lancaster, once asked if" Carters" were never lost on the sands. "
I never knew any lost," said the guide;" there's one or two drowned no and then, but theyere generally found somewhere i' th bed when the tide goes out."
A certain ancient mariner, called Nutall, who lives at Grange, on the Cartmel shore, told me that" people who get their living by' following the sands,' hardly ever die in their beds.
They end their days on the sands; and even their horses and carts are generally lost there. "
I have helped," said he" to pull horses and coaches, aye, and guides too out of the sands.
The channel," he continued" is seldom two days together, in one place.
You may make a chart one day, and, before the ink is dry, it will have shifted."
I found, indeed, by inquiry, that those who have travelled the sands longest, are always most afraid of them; and that these silent currents, which shimmer so beautifully in the sunshine, have been" the ribs of death" to thousands.
The old" Over Sands" route began at Hest Bank, a cliff on the shore, about three miles from Lancaster.
The coach, and whatever travellers might be going, used to meet the guide on the banks of the River Keer, which runs over the sands, about three miles from Hest Bank.
Here the guide carefully tried the bed of the stream before travellers were allowed to cross - for what was fordable yesterday to-day might be quicksand.
The safe tracks are indicated by branches of furze, called" brogs," stuck in the sand.
The old word" brog," means a broken branch; and it is very likely that the word" brob," applied by the people of Furness and Cartmel to these furze branches, is merely a corruption of the former word.
On reaching Kent's Bank, the coach went about three miles through the villages on the Cartmel shore, and then forward across the Leven estuary, to Ulverstone town.
These sands, though not one third the distance of the sands between Lancaster and Kent's Bank are considered much more dangerous.
Probably the difference may arise from the greater number of persons crossing from Cartmel to Ulverstone.
In every village, and in almost every house I entered, upon the shores of this bay, I met with tales of danger and disaster which have occurred upon these sands; and even now there is a kind of daily excitement there, arising from the dangerous possibilities of travelling over them.
Such was the old" Over Sands" route from Lancaster.
In Mrs Hemans' letters she thus alludes to the journey; -" I must not omit to tell you that Mr. Wordsworth not only admired our exploit in crossing the Ulverstone sands as a deed of' derring do,' but as a decided proof of taste.
The lake scenery, he says, is never seen to such advantage as after the passage of what he calls its majestic barrier."
This impressive scene may now be traversed by all who prefer speed and ease to danger and delay, free from the uncertainties of the old route.
Along the picturesque northern shores of the" majestic barrier," the new line of railway from Lancaster to Ulverstone winds by Silverdale, with the grand features of land and sea in sight; and the traveller lakewards may, at comparatively little cost of time and money, look upon a scene so strikingly different to what he will find in the country he is going to, that the variety itself cannot but add to the interest of his journey.
The length of the line from Carnforth six miles beyond Lancaster, to Ulverstone, is about twenty miles, and, for two - thirds of its length, it commands a continually changing view of Morecambe Bay.
It often runs over large tracts of the sands, where the waves sometimes come lashing the embankment, like ocean skirmishers sent out from the main body to remonstrate with this bold invader of its old domain.
On the landward side, every mile brings a new picture; the land is full of changeful picturesqueness of indentation, and the shelving shores of light-hued limestone rock are rich in exquisite variety of form and colour.
The woods are peculiarly beautiful, their lighter shades being charmingly relieved by numbers of the dark green yew, full of brave remembrances of England and forest life in the olden time.
Here, where the rugged selvedge of our mountain district softens into slopes of fertile beauty by the fitful sea, - and where the mountain streams wind silently seaward over the sands, we flit by many a sylvan nook, and many a country nest, where we should be glad to linger; - and by the outlet of many a little paradisal glen, nestling in the verdant creases of Cartmel, which, once seen, will remain a bower of beautiful remembrance, where the mind may find a resting-place even in the city's bust throng.
Early in the month of May I found myself, one fine evening, walking about the platform of Carnforth Station, waiting for the train to Ulverstone.
It was that time of day when the birds were beginning to get stiller, and might be heard more distinctly than before, singing their little nestward solos drowsily, here and there among the trees.
The train started, and for the first time I was rolling towards Ulverstone, by way of the Cartmel shore.
We were soon over the little River Keer, which, having left the hills, comes gliding through a green plain on the right, and then, over the Lancaster sands, where its shifty channel has been the death-bed of many a gallant man.
There is an old saying in these part which is often repeated with a sigh, by people who have felt its truth, - " The kent and the Keer Have parted many a good man and his meear."
Now we come to Silverdale station, where brown-faced fishermen are waiting to see their bags of cockles and hampers of flukes sent off to the southern markets by the next train.
In a few minutes we are off again.
Gardens, and comfortable stone-built farm-houses, and little orchards all white with apple-blossom are flitting by.
The ragged summits of Cartmel draw nearer to the eye; and as we draw near the Kent estuary, the view of the Cumberland mountains, in the northward distance, is very good.
Just before reaching the station at Arnside we catch a glimpse of Arnside Tower, a massive old peel, on an eminence at the head of a solitary vale to seaward.
Over a few fields on the opposite side of the line is another of these border peels, called Heslop Tower.
Delightful Arnside!
If any man loves the beautiful in nature - if he be a geologist, or a botanist, or an invalid in search of peaceful restoration - let him wander about Arnside, and pleasant Silverdale - which is close by.
Shortly after this evening ride I returned for a ramble about Arnside, one sunny day, in company with Mr. W. Salmon, F.G. s., president of the Horticultural Society of Ulverstone, and Mr. John Bolton of Swathmoor, a noble geologist, and a personal" friend and fellow-labourer" of professor Sedgwick.
Mr. Bolton's disinterested ardour in the cause of science, his eminent knowledge of the geology of Furness and Cartmel, and his general characteristics, have justly won for him the name of" the Hugh Miller of the north of England."
The day was so fine, and the scene so beautiful, that we were blithe as three lads going a-nutting to the woods on a sunshiny holiday.
The old station-master at Arnside knew the names of the hills around, and every remarkable point of the glorious landscape.
We chatted with him a few minutes, watching the beautiful effect of a cloud-shadow gliding over the limestone crags of" Whitbarrow" in the sunlight; and, after begging a few matches, we lit our cigars, and took up a shady lane towards the hill called" Arnside Knott."
Having wound up this pleasant lane, between tall bushy hedgerows, about half a mile, we met a gamekeeper, who gave us directions for the ascent of the" Knott," warning us against the use of fire, by which considerable damage had been done in the woods above.
Skirting the eastern slope of the hill, a good road brought us into the vale at the head of which" Arnside Tower," a massive old square building of limestone, stands, a lonesome, gloomy-looking ruin.
It is finely situated on an isthmus which connects the two peninsulas of Arnside and Silverdale.
Seaward, it commands a view of Warton Sands, and looks right over the bay, out to Peel Castle, off the far western point of Low Furness.
Eastward, it overlooks the lone green vale of Arnside, with its little tarn shining in the hollow; and beyond there is a view of Farleton Knot, and of the sands formed by the River Keer.
The walls of this ancient border stronghold are of great thickness, and the small rude windows.
doorways, shot-holes, and quaint fire-places are still visible.
There are no evidences of any other ancient outbuildings or defences connected with it, and, probably, as Dr. Whittaker says," It has been merely a place of temporary retreat, in case of sudden alarm from the north, for the neigbouring inhabitants."
With the exception of an old farmhouse, a little below the tower, there is no other building in all the vale of Arnside.
The old name of the township was" Earnseat," from the" earn," for which it was a favorite retreat in ancient times.
The district, esoecially about the" Knott," is famous for rare ferns, and the northern shore of that rocky height is a fovourite wandering ground of the geologist.
Leaving the road on the slope of" Arnside Knott," we walked through the old farmyard below, and thence up to the tower.
Within, all was ruined, and wild, and roofless, but we found the winding limestone staircase sufficiently good for us to get to the top without difficulty.
Here we sat down on the broad, grass-grown, ruined wall, to look about us.
In spite of the beauty of the woods on" Arnside Knot," the greenness of the vale, and the fine views east and west, there was a touch of desolation in the scene, to which the mouldering tower we sat upon contributed a solemn share.
In the east a train laden with Furness ore darted by the end of the vale, and broke the dreamy stillness with remembrances of the active world.
It passed, and all was still again, except where a number of swallows skimmed the air in graceful flight between our ruined resting-place and the ground.
I chanced to fling some shreds of paper from the tower, which, as they were borne away in quivering gyrations by the wind, were instantly pursued by birds, and rarely reached the ground before they were caught by one or other of these dainty ariels, and carried off to nooks in the eaves of the old farmhouse below.
One of my friends said it reminded him of the pursuit of knowledge under difficulties, and was another evidence of the growing taste for reading in these times.
Another suggested that perhaps these Arnside swallows might inherit the souls of departed polititians, and were anxious to know something of the political movements of the day; and, pointing to a bird which dropped the shred he had caught in his bill, he said that one evidently did n't agree with the leading article, and therefore declined to take the paper in any further.
Another thought that they might have heard of the dispute about the duty, or might be in some way interested n the consumption of the article.
But rumblings of distant thunder warned us that we had far to go, so we came down the stairs of the ruined tower, and began the ascent of" Arnside Knott."
A good footpath leads aslant the hill, through groves of larch, spruce, and fir, whose different hues of green look very beautiful in the sunshine.
About half way we left the footpath, and struck up the shingly hill-side to save time.
The slope was steeper than an ordinary roof, and the shingles gave way at every step; but we toiled up, often using our hands, till we reached a green spot at the edge of the wood upon the summit.
Here, among gorse bushes and tufts of ling, we found it pleasant to rest.
The view was fine from this point.
At the foot of the hill lay the lone valley of Arnside, with its hoary tower standing at the head, like a worn-out soldier dreaming of departed wars - and its silvery pool shining in the green hollow, the little bright eye of that silent dell.
Over the fir-clad ridge beyond we had a charming glimpse of Silverdale, and its sequestered village near the sea.
I understand that the sands on Silverdale shore are very fine for bathing.
In this delightful dale there is a small lake called" Hawes Tarn," crowded with pike, and remarkable for its thick bed of snow-white, tiny univalve sea-shells, of fragile beauty.
The waters of this tarn are said to be affected by the rise and fall of the tide.
The sun was shining all around, and we had a full view of" Farleton Knott," and the picturesque limestone bridges running eastward.
In a far corner of the Milnthorpe Sands, the white tower of Heversham church peeped out prettily from the green woods down by the shore; whilst in the east all the great Yorkshire hills were robed in gloom, and solemn rollings of distant thunder told that a storm was raging among them.
It was a glorious sight; but cool gusts came now and then through the sunshine, and the trees on" Arnside Knott" began to talk of the coming tempest.
Our old friend said that rain would certainly overtake us before the day had run by, and as a fir tree was but a riddly shelter in the heavy showers, we had better get nearer to the haunts of man.
He pocketed his geological hammer, strung his strong wallet over his shoulder, and let on through scratchy brushwood, under the green shades that cover all the hill top, emerging on the northern slope, from whence the view of" Whitbarrow," the shores and sands and channel of the Kent, and the distant mountains of Cumberland, is wonderfully fine.
Descending to the water side, our old friend donned his spectacles, and took out his hammer again; and the two geologists wandered about the rocky shore in a trance of scientific delight, picking up many specimens interesting to them.
One of these specimens I was requested to show to an eminent geologist in Manchester, whose name was familiar to them.
We found some simple, substantial cheer at a little country inn, called the" Fighting Cocks," near the river side.
From this place we went westward a mile or so, then up the valley of the Winster to" Castle Head," where we spent two pleasant hours in the house and grounds.
From thence we crossed over" Aggerslack," down into" Lindal Lane," then up the opposite steep again, by way of" Slack Farm," right over thr rocky summit of" Hampsfell," descending into the town of Cartmel, where we took tea at the Cavendish Arms, the principal inn, which stands on the site of the ancient priory buildings, near the church.
A seven mile walk in the gloaming through Cartmel park, by the woods of Holker, and partly over the Leven Sands, brought us to Ulverstone about ten at night, after twenty miles walk, just in time to get well wet by the storm which we had watched in the forenoon from the eastern edge of" Arnside Knott."
In spite of this, hardly ever had a more delightful ramble through a more finely-varied country than the one I had that day.
After this passing notice of my excursion to Arnside, I will now return to my first ride to Ulverstone by rail.
Soon after the train leaves Arnside station, the great bay begins to shew itself as we rumble over the fine viaduct that crosses the River Kent, and the yellow sand of its estuary spread out on each hand.
One of my fellow-travellers pointed to a lonely stork standing quietly in the midst of the sandy waste, like some weird genius of the solitude.
On the other side, near the embankment, the" Old John," the oldest trading vessel of Morecambe bay, was ashore.
The low slopes near the line are richly wooded with light-hued larch, and spruce, and fir, mingling beautifully with dark green yew trees.
The line now clips the rocky shore for about a mile, and we are rolling over the little River Winster, one of the boundary lines of Lancashire and Westmorland; but, like the rest of these waters in Morecambe bay, so changeful in its course over the sands, that yon pretty island, a little way from the shore, which looks" as quiet as a spot of sky among the evening clouds," has been known to be first in Lancashire, then in Westmorland, and back again in Lancashire, all in a month's time, through the caprice of this little Winster, which, when the fit is on it, thus plays at hide-and-seek with the two counties.
The scenery richens as we roll along.
The grand bay on one side, on the other picturesque rocks and snatches of woodland, sloping to the shore, with the wild fells behind, all going by in panoramic flight.
It was about low water: the sun was setting, and all that great marine wilderness, beyond which the retired sea was out of sight - if a long line of golden light, far off, had not told its whereabouts - that sandy expanse was so still that, but for here and there a stranded boat, and a smack left aslant on the shore in the distance, it might have been a sea-beach belonging to some world unknown to man.
This threshold of the mighty sea, where its children come to play, and on which so many suns have looked the grand farewell of day was once more lighted with a glory which made the pomp of man seem poor.
The valley, on the right hand, through which the Winster flows, is a beautiful scene.
The level plain, enclosed by an irregular semicircle of hills, is all land reclaimed from the sea at different times.
More than four hundred acres have been added to this reclamation by the new railway line.
A remarkable conical hill, thickly clothed with wood, rises form the plain, in an isolated way.
This singular height is called" Castle Head," anciently," Atterpile Castle."
There is a quaint mansion in a secluded part of the grounds, and" if ever there was a house with a story, that looks like one."
The sea formerly washed round the hill, and, as the old mariner at Grange told me," t must have been a capital place for smuggling in those days."
" Castle Head" is supposed to have been a Roman settlement, or outpost of some kind, from the discovery of coins, ornaments, and other articles of Roman workmanship.
About sixty years ago many curious articles were found there, among which were parts of a human skull, ver - tebrae, etc., teeth of buffaloes, tusks of boar, pieces of limestone, resembling hen's eggs; rings of blue ragstone, lead, clay, and glass; ninety - five sticas of Northumbrian kings, seventy - five Roman coins, a stone, supposed to have been a mould for casting silver rings; iron ore, petrified bore, pebbles, impressions of clay, pottery, or bone, and other ancient relics.
This looks as if" Castle Head" was a place of many strange stories, which have drifted into the misty past to return no more.
The tenantless hall of" Castle Head" stands amongst woods and gardens at the rearward base of this lonely looking height.
The sole inhabitants of the place, at present, consist of a Scotch gardener and his family.
When I visited the spot, with my two scientific friends, we wandered some time before we met with" Sandy," till, at last, by dint of shouting - which seemed to hush into wistful stillness the lonely woods around - we roused him from one of the hot-houses.
He led us through the echoing rooms of the empty mansion, up to the roof, from which we had a good view of the gardens and grounds.
After this we ascended, by circuitous paths and rocky bemossed steps, terrace after terrace to the shady plateau upon the summit of this singular hill, which certainly is suggestive of a deserted encampment.
I could imagine any of the races which have had mastery in Britain occupying that commanding eminence.
The views over the bay, from embowered seats and recesses on the southern edge, are very beautiful.
Obliging" Sandy" was full of simple earnestness about ferns and flowers.
He seemed to have little enthusiasm about anything but horticulture, except autographs, of which he shewed us a curious store, collected during many years.
He was quite at home in this picturesque solitude, although the place is said to be haunted, and" Thir folk i' the village o' Lindal, wha wadna walk ower' t after dark for the hail estate."
In the lower escarpment of rock, on the southern side, our old geological friend pointed out a place where the union of the two stratifications of slate and limestone shews distinctly.
This is the only place in the district where this union is so clearly visible.
Nearly opposite the green recess in which" Castle Head" is such a singular feature of the scene," Holme Island" stands in the bay, about two hundred yards from the railway line, and, as Spenser says, it " Seems so sweet and pleasant to the eye, That it would tempt a man to touchen there."
Less than half a century since, this island was little more than a black rock, partly covered with thorns, whins, and wild savin-bushes - a lone domain of wind and wave, and birds that love the sea.
Within that time, however, it has, at immense expense, been converted into a perfect marine paradise.
Though not much more than eleven acres in extent, the gardens and grounds are so tastefully varied that a man may ramble an hour or two about it and still find himself in a new scene - still meet with" something rich and strange" - and, in some parts, the little landscape is so artfully natural in appearance and so lapped in pleasant shade, that he might easily forget it was the result of man's taste and enterprise, and fancy himself in some bowery nook of a wide park.
On the western side of the island, a white limestone building, modelled after the temple of Vesta, looks out westward over the bay; and, in sheltered nooks, rock-hewn stairs lead down to sand-banks so smooth, so gently-swelling and secluded, that fair Sabrina might sit there - " Under the cool translucent wave Her bright hair knitting" - free from fear of intrusion.
The grounds and gardens are rich in plants and flowers of the rarest description, from all parts of the world.
The house is shadily situated, about the middle of the island, among fine trees and tasteful grounds.
From the highest points and openings in the shades of" Holme Island" - that sylvan gem of waters - the views are wildly beautiful or solemnly grand, whichever way we turn.
Far out, off the extreme north-western shore of the bay, the massive ruins of Peel Castle - that ancient stronghold of the abbots of Furness - stand mouldering in wild isolation among the waves.
They have done with the marauding Scot, the pomp of prelates, and the din of war; abd now, all silent and unsentinelled, they glide majestically into the wastes of time.
Left to the washing waves and whistling winds - a crumbling shelter of the seabird - on that treeless isle, " The empty ruins lapsed again Into nature's wide domain, Sow themselves with seed and grain, As day and night and day go by."
Leaving this ruined fortress, the eye travels along the low fertile shores on which the ancient town and castle of Aldingham, now washed away, once stood near the sea.
The bold peaks of high Furness arise in the rearward of the scene.
The village of Bardsea, Conishead Priory, the town of Ulverstone, and the beautiful estuary of the Leven, are all hidden form" Holme Island" by Humphrey Head; but on the north, it commands a fine view of the most picturesque part of the Cartmel shore, with the tops of its woody fells standing against the sky, like the wild outlines of a petrified tempest.
Looking east, the fells between Lancaster and Kendal, and beyond these, Ingleborough and other Yorkshire hills, may be seen.
Southward, and immediately opposite the island, is Arnside Knot, with its fir-grove crown.
Farther south, Warton Crags rise up, and villas and white mansions gleam along the thickly-wooded lower slopes, till Silverdale Point seems to shoot into the bay, like a dark needle.
Beyond this, the green ridges of Bolton Le-Sands, Hest Bank, Heysham, Poulton Le-Sands, the" Sunderland Shoulder," and the estuary of the Lune," that to old Loncaster his name doth lend," of which River Michael Drayton says so cheerily: - " For salmon me excels; and for this name of Lun, That I am christened by, the Britons it begun, Which fulness doth import of waters still increase To Neptune lowting low, when christal Lune doth cease, And Conder coming in conducts her by the hand, Till lastly she salutes the point of Sunderland, And leaves our dainty Lune to Amphitrite's care.
So blyth and bonny now the lads and lasses are, That ever and anon the bagpipe up doth blow; Cast in a gallant round about the hearth the go, And every village smokes at wakes with lusty cheer, Then hey, they cry, for Lune, and hey for Lancashire.
That one high hill was heard to tell it to his brother.
All this, however, gives a very imperfect idea of the great extent and variety of view from" Holme Island."
The shores of Cartmel, seen from the groves of this little emerald gem of Morecambe Bay, look very beautiful.
Chapter The Second.
It is the shout of the coming foe, Ride, ride for thy life, Sir John; But still the waters deeper grew, The wild sea foam rushed on Old Ballad.
A little beyond" Holme Island," and about half way between Carnforth abd Ulverstone, the train stops at the seaside village of Grange.
It looks very inviting from the railway, but not till one is in it can they fairly see how pretty it is, and how fine the views are from its higher parts.
From the rail it looks a cluster of gardens and white limestone houses scattered about the undulant lower slopes of Yewbarrow, - a craggy, wooded height which fills the background.
It matters little where you build a house in Grange, it is sure to have a pleasant outlook, and is never in the way of its neighbour; for the land over which the dwellings are so picturesquely dribbled, is all fertile dingles, and knolls, and nest-like nooks, mixed with bloomy orchards, flower gardens, and scattered tufts of wood; and there are several mansions thereabout, whose green shades and ornamental grounds give a park-like tone to the skirts of the village.
Near the church, as usual, there is an old inn.
The open space in front of" The Crown," commands a good view of the eastern part of the bay, with the Yorkshire hills behind, and all the picturesque fells and wooded shores on the Lancaster side.
Grange, though not unknown to fame among lovers of nature and wanderers to the sea, has, like the rest of Cartmel, been peculiarly secluded by its position.
The Lancaster and Ulverstone line now runs by the foot of the village, bringing it into direct communication with the main lines from the south.
Before the railway was made, the tide washed the garden walls at the foot of the village.
As I walked about the open elevated ground in front of the Crown, looking at the bay and the hills, I asked several questions of villagers who were lounging about.
They eyed me from head to foot, wondering where I came from, and what I had to do with their hills and dales, at last settling in their minds that I must be a strange land-surveyor, preparing for fresh changes in that part of the country.
I think the old landlord himself began to be puzzled, for, beckoning to a stalwart young man, who stood down in the village-street with a bundle of papers in his hand, he said -" That's the man for ye.
He's read a deeal o' books.
He knaas summat abaat ivvery thing, nearly; an' he knaas mair abaat Grange, I sud think, than onybody in it."
I found him an enthusiastic entomologist and ornithologist, and a very unassuming, intelligent man, of manly manners.
We sat down in the Crown chatting, and listening whilst" Aad Blly," a blind fiddler, who lives by scattering music among the folk of Cartmel Fells, played" Scots wha hae w' Wallace bled," and" Bannocks o' bear meal, bannocks o' barley."
The old man beat time with hs foot, and accompanied his instrument with a curious croon, which made up in quaintness for what it lacked in harmony.
I could not help thinking, as he sat there, that a country village without a blind fiddler is wanting in a valuable feature of human interest.
Leaving" Aad Billy" at the end of" Over Bogie," my friend proposed that we should go to the top of" Yewbarrow," the hill at the rear of th village, from the summit of which he said the views were magnificent.
As we went out at the head of the village by a shady road, he opened the gate of a small enclosed knoll, on the right hand, saying," Stop; my workshop is in here.
We'll peep at it, if you like, before we go up."
In the centre of this enclosure there was a rude, round hut, built of limestone, something like a large summer-house.
On entering, I found myself in a little museum, filled with strange birds, and carefully arranged glass-cases of rare shells and insects.
Against the wall hung a broken skeleton head and horns of the Irish elk, which had been found in the neighbouring sands, a few years ago.
In one corner was reared a large slab of red sandstone, from Storton, in Cheshire, on which were plainly imprinted the footsteps of some antediluvian creature; he thought it was the plesiosaurus.
The place was full of curiosities; and I noticed a live wood-owl, in a cage outside, with its large, lustrous eyes, blinking in the sunshine.
Leaving this little sanctum of science, we went through the shady grounds of" Yewbarrow Lodge," and thence, by rocky, sinuous paths to the summit of Yewbarrow.
This hill takes its name from the yew tree, for the growth of which it is remarkable, and from" barrow," a cairn or burial place.
Here I was glad to sit down and look round, for I was out of wind, and the view had grown grander as we rose.
Morecambe and a great extent of its shores were full in sight, the slopes and lowlands all beauty and fertility, all above and in the distance wild and majestic.
My friend told me that, on a favourable day, the town of Lancaster was almost as distinctly in sight as the houses at the foot of the hill; but he surprised me more by saying that the ivy-clad limestone rocks upon the summit of Yewbarrow were unmistakably water-worn, that is, worn by the action of the sea.
The village lay under the eye, as clearly as a map or model on a table.
We could see all its houses, perching or nestling picturesquely among straggling gardens and nooks of bloomy shade.
We could see all its mansions, with their rich grounds, and woods now spreading out the bright green of spring in the sunshine; its white roads and bye lanes, winding through orchards, and under over-lapping trees, about the green knolls and dingles, and lacing the land with lines of ever-varying loveliness.
Grange is no less pleasant in its own quiet beauty, and in the scenery about it, than in the salubrity of its climate, which is said to rival that of the southern coast of England.
In spring, its average temperature is higher than that of any other place in the north of England.
In summer, the heat is tempered by the saline breeze.
Beautifully seated on the slope of Yewbarrow, it is sheltered on the north and west by the green hills, and its natural charms are heightened by the never-palling witcheries of the changeful sea.
Artists, and other curious children of nature, who love to go about the world find its neighbourhood full of interest.
It was a beautiful sight; and, as I descended the hill by another route, to meet the train, I resolved that, if possible, it should not be long before I looked upon the peaceful nest again.
The grandest height near Grange is Hampsfell, at the rear of Yewbarrow.
Whosoever desires to see that country well, ought to ascend Hampsfell, at sunrise or sunset, on a fine day, and he may look upon a scene of such magnificence as is rarely met with in any land.
For those who are not strong, a carriage road leads up the south side of Eggerslack Wood, nearly to the summit of the fell; but the sturdy pedestrian should go out at the lower end of Grange, and up the narrow romantic glen, called" Lindal Lane," till he comes to a farmhouse called" Slack," on the left hand side of the road.
The shady gorge is a little fairy-land of woodland beauty in summer time.
After crossing the yard of Slack farm, a rough footpath leads up through plantations of larch and spruce, and coppice woods of oak and hazel, sprinkled, now and then, with the glittering birch - that silver-robed lady of the woods - the beech, the ash" for nothing ill," the alder, and the dark green yew," obedient to the bender's will."
These woods, which are carefully cultivated for" bobbin wood," hoops, wicker-work and other purposes, are great sources of employment to the people around.
As the traveller winds through the sylvan scene, by changeful pleasure upward led, he meets with glimpses of the sea, gleaming through the southward trees; and there is many a nook of the mountain path where he may sit in cool shadow, listening to the wild birds which fill the woods with their tuneful joy.
Emerging from this leafy screen, he finds rocky, unshaded moorlands, stretching upwards in silent desolation.
Picturesque masses of limestone crop out from the heathery waste, their ragged crevices beautiful with plumy ferns.
There is still a rude pathway to the summit, but for a good walker, what country folk call" The Crow Gate," which means right a-head, across the trackless moor will be more interesting.
At length, the top of a square, limestone appears on the distant height.
This is" Hampsfell Hospice," a modern erection, built by a former pastor of Cartmel parish, for the shelter and entertainment of wanderers over the fell.
As he draws nearer this little benevolent coronet of lonely Hampsfell, mountain and vale, and land and sea, expand so gloriously, that he cannot but halt now and then to gaze around with wonder and delight.
Inside the tower there are stone seats, and a good fireplace, for which the heather around affords ready and abundant kindling.
Upon the walls are wooden tablets, inscribed with verses allusive to the scenery, and the purpose of the building.
From these I copied the following; - " This hospice has an open door, Welcome alike to rich and poor; A roomy seat for young and old, Where they may screen them from the cold; Three windows that command a view, To north, to west, and southward too; A flight of steps requiring care; A roof that shews a prospect rare; Mountain and vale you thence survey, - The winding steams and noble bay.
The sun at noon the shadow hides Along the east and westward sides.
A lengthened chain holds guard around, To keep the cattle from the ground.
Kind reader, freely take your pleasure, But do no mischief to my treasure!"
From the roof of this" Hospice" the views are indeed glorious, both in variety of character and extent of range.
Fertile, peace-breathing valleys; old castles and churches, and quaint hamlets and towns, - eloquent relics of past history; lonely glens, rich parks, and forest steeps; picturesque homesteads, in pleasant nooks of shelter; beautiful estuaries; the fresh blue bay; bleak brown moorlands; wild craggy fells; and storm-worn mountains, each different in height and form, the grand old guardians of the magnificent scene.
Beginning with Peel Castle in the sea-washed west, the eye wanders over solemn Black Coomb, and Druid Swinstead, and all the Coniston range, in which the bold round peak of the" Old Man" is the most familiar mark.
Then come Langdale Pikes, Scaw Fell, Great End, Bow Fell, from height to height, till" the dark brow of the Mighty Helvellyn," rises up majestically above the green valley of St. John.
Looking eastward, we see the pleasant vale of the Kent, with its fine estuary; the woodland shores of Milnthorpe; the grand crags of Whitbarrow and Farleton, with kindred limestone ridges stretching out beyond.
Further eastward the hills of Yorkshire rise in the blue sky.
In the south, over Arnside, Silverdale, and Warton, we have the fells and green lowlands of the Lancaster side; ridge after ridge then hides the Lune and the Wyre till the masts and lighthouse of Fleetwood shew themselves far out to seaward.
If the day be fine, the mountains of Wales, the Isle of Man, and even the coast of Ireland may sometimes be seen.
It is a glorious combination of land and sea; but, perhaps, the most charming bit of all the landscape is the valley of Cartmel, just at the western foot of Hampsfell.
The little town, nestling round its venerable church, looks so near that one might almost expect to hear some sounds of life arise therefrom; but it is as still down there in the middle of the sunlit vale as if it was only the quaint centre-piece in the pattern of a green carpet.
I fell that what is here written gives but an imperfect idea of the wonderful prospects commanded by Hampsfell; and I can only add that no traveller, who has opportunity, and cares for the glories of nature, ought to go by the mountain unclimbed.
I have noticed, after ascending some of the highest points of that district, that although the same objects may chance to be seen from several heights, yet the points of view are so different that in each case we get a new picture.
In the neighbourhood of Grange there are several mansions and houses of considerable interest, such as" Abbot Hall,"" Hampsfield Hall;"" Witherslack Hall" - a fine old house, formerly belonging to the earls of Derby;" Cark Hall,"" Bigland Hall,"" Merlewood,"" Levens Hall;" and" Holker Hall," the favourite seat of the Duke of Devonshire, with its noble park sloping down to picturesque cliffs of mountain limestone and old red sandstone.
Holker park contains many remarkable trees, of much greater size than is common so near the sea.
The distance from Grange to Newby Bridge, at the foot of Windermere, is six miles.
The road thither winds out at the lower end of Grange, between the woody heights of Aggerslack and Blawith, and up the beautiful glen called" Lindal Lane."
An omnibus runs twice a day in summer between these points, through the villages of Lindal and Newton.
The village of Lindal, about two miles from Grange, is worth going a long way to look at.
It is not only picturesque in itself, but is picturesquely situated among scenes of singular beauty, and commands an enchanting peep of the bay, with a view of the vale in which Castle Head is such a singular feature.
The whole six miles' ride to Newby bridge through Cartmel Fells is of interest to anyone who can enjoy the contrast of peaceful fertility overlooked by craggy wilderness, which he will pass through on the way.
Quaint Cartmel, the market town of the sequestered district which bears its name, is little more than two miles north of Grange - a pleasant walk over the hills on a fine day.
Its noble old priory is the only conventual church in Lancashire which escaped mutilation after the dissolution of the monasteries.
The escape arose partly from its being the parish church, as well as the church of the priory.
About three miles from this town, and about the same form Grange, is the famous" Holy Well of Cartmel" - a fine medicinal spring, which us a great attraction in the summer months.
Its waters are celebrated for the cure of gout, and cutaneous diseases.
For many years past the miners employed in the Alston Moor Lead Mines, being liable to certain diseases arising from the nature of their labours, have made annual pilgrimage to the village of Kent's Bank, near here, in order to have the benefit of Cartmel's" Holy Well."
Cartmel is a settlement of great antiquity.
Camden says of the district, that" in 677, Egfrid, King of Northumbria, gave St. Cuthbert the land, and all the Britons in it."
" In 1188," according to Baines," the foundation of a priory for canons regular of St. Augustine was laid by William Mareschal, the elder, Earl of Pembroke."
His charter concludes with these words: -" This house I have founded for the increase of our holy religion, giving and granting to it every kind of liberty that heart can conceive, or mouth utter; and whoever shall in any way infringe upon these immunities, or injure the said priory, may he incur the curse of God, of the blessed Virgin Mary, and all other saints, as well as my particular malediction."
This priory was enriched by many grants and donations of pontiffs and princes, and many" offerings of the faithful."
The town is situated in a vale watered by two streams, one running north and the other south.
Between these streams stands the fine old conventual hall, with its curious belfry rising from the central tower, a square inscribed within a square, diagonal to its base.
Of course, there is a tradition connected with the foundation of Cartmel Priory.
It seems that nearly seven hundred years ago, a number of foreign monks, wondering about the country in search of a settlement, somehow found their way into this, then, dense forest wild.
They were preparing to build their church upon a hill-top in the neighbourhood, when a voice spoke to them of of the air, saying:" Not there; but in a valley between two rivers, where one runs north and the other south."
It seems unfortunate that the voice should neglect to tell them where that valley was, as they happened to be so near it at the time.
But it was so; for these homeless fathers wandered, after that, all over the north of England, in fruitless search, until they found the place, at last, near the very hill where they first heard" the voice in the air."
Here, on an island of hard ground between these singular streams, they built the Priory of Cartmel, and dedicated it to St. Mary.
They also built a small chapel on the hill, where they heard the voice, and they dedicated it to St. Bernard.
The chapel is now gone, but the hill is called" St. Bernard's Mount" to this day.
Going form a crowded city into this little monastic town is almost like going to bed, or sinking into an antiquarian dream, - all is so quaint and quiet.
The market place is a square of old-fashioned houses, with the fish stones near the middle.
This old market-place looked so drowsy when I first saw it that it seemed astonished if anybody walked across it; and the people in the houses about, if they hear a foot on the pavement outside, look through their windows and say" What's that?"
and if it happens to be a stranger, they call the rest of the household, and stare, and say to one another," Whoever can he be; and what can have brought him hither?"
On one side of the square, an ancient gateway leads into a cloistral old street, in which the principle inn is situated.
This gateway is a relic of the original buildings connected with the priory.
There are inns of more imposing appearance, but I met with kind attention and good cheer at the King's Arms, near the bridge, where I spent a pleasant hour among some hungry wood-cutters, who had been at work all day in the fells.
Following the advice of a former traveller in Cartmel, I had inquired of a man with a red nose, who happened to be leaning on the bridge, where could get a good glass of ale, and he directed me to this house.
I found the place filled with a very cheerful smell; and, in a few minutes, I got so thick with the woodcutters, who were waiting for their evening meal, that I was invited to join them at a great dish of" lobscouse," prepared by the handsome, good tempered landlady.
Judging by the speed with which the dish was emptied, I should say that every stomach there was in good order; and I only hope these jolly woodmen had not miscalculated my capacity when they invited me; - for, simple as the fare was, the feast was fine.
We finished off with oatcake, and butter and cheese, with a glorious dish of crisp water-cresses - the whole seasoned with a good deal of hearty fun, which is not the worst part of the best meal a man can eat.
From this house the landlord directed me to an old building, occupied as a saddler's shop, in the opposite corner of the square.
Here I found the parish clerk, William Lancaster, who put down his saddlery, donned his coat, and took me through the church and up to the top of the central tower.
The walls of the choir and transept of this old church belong to the first erection; the windows are of later date.
There is a noble east window, fort-feet high, containing some fine stained glass.
On the north side of the proper choir is a narrow chapel, anciently called the" Piper's Choir;" and on the south side what is called the" Town Choir," which has two stone seats for the officiating priests.
This is supposed to have been anciently the parish church.
There are twenty - six ancient stalls in the choir, with their grotesquely-carved misereres, all in perfect condition.
There are many ancient monumental decorations in this church; but the most remarkable is a magni - ficent monument of the Harrington family, under an arched canopy.
In the old library I was shewn some rare and curious books, among which were the following: -" The Second Part of the Faerie Queene, containing the Fourth, Fifth and Sixth Bookes.
By Ed.
Spencer.
printed at London, for William Ponsonby, 1596."
A folio copy of" Fox's Book of Martyrs," in black letter, 1610.
A quarto copy of the works of Thomas Aquinas, in black letter, printed at Venice, in 1509.
A quaint little volume entitled" Apophthegemes New and Old, collected by the Right Honourable Francis Lo.
Verulam, Viscount St. Alban, 1625."
The ancient parish register of Cartmel for the last 300 years.
As we came out the clerk pointed to the Duke of Devonshire's pew; and I found, everywhere, that his grace, and the family altogether, have won the right good-will of the people of Cartmel.
After a parting stroll by twilight round the noble old church, and its calm, quaint, pastoral town, just as the stars began to struggle in the sapphire vault with declining day, I took the lonely road to Grange, through Allithwaite, a rude village, whose inhabitants, like those of Cark and Flookborough live mainly by fishing and cockling upon the sands.
These villages consist principally, in each case, of one straggling street of humble cottages; and though there is not much attraction in their outward appearance, considerable interest attaches to the peculiar way of human life therein.
Some idea of the fishery on this shore may be had from the fact that, in addition to flook, plaice, salmon, and other fish, there is sometimes as much as a thousand tons of cockles sent from Cark, in one season, principally to the towns of South Lancashire.
Cockles are found in large beds, called" skeers."
The fish is buried about an inch below the surface, and its place is known by two little holes in the sand, called" eyes;" from thence the cockler whips out the fish with a kind of three - pronged fork, called a" craam."
Although these cocklers generally belong to the poorest class of people, no quarrels take place among them on the sands.
This arises from a firm belief that if ever they quarrel there, the cockles would leave that place with the next tide.
It is these three fishing villages that the lead-miners of Northumberland and other visitors to the" Holy Well" take up their quarters, but chiefly, I believe, at Flookborough, where there is comfortable accommodation to be had.
Flookborough, as its name indicates, was formerly a market town, holding a charter granted to the prior of Cartmel, by Edward to First.
After the dissolution, this charter was removed to Cartmel.
The first part of the name may or may not come from the fish so common on these shores, - but I heard that a certain dignitary of the church, once visiting there, inquired of a villager how many souls( soles) there were in the place, and the man replied," Well, I dinnet justly knaa; but here's a terrible deeal o' flooks abaat."
The country between Grange and the Leven sands, about five miles, is very interesting.
Soon after the train leaves Grange, we run through a rocky cutting, which brings us to Cark Station, two miles from Cartmel, to which town an omnibus runs daily in summer time.
The line that passes Kent's bank, with its pleasantly situated villas, near which" Abbot Hall," a modest, modern mansion, stands in that green corner of the shore, on the site of an old house, said to have belonged to a slyly-jovial prelate of the olden time.
Leaving this place, we run about two miles by the promontory of Humphrey Head, and then begin to cross Ulverstone Sands.
The scenery about Humphrey Head is a fine mixture of the bold and the beautiful; and the country around is full of picturesque rambles.
Up in its yew-crowned cliffs there is a remarkable cave, believed by the natives to be an abode of fairies.
The famous" Holy Well" is on the western shore of this fine promontory.
Upon a low fertile level, between Grange and Humphrey Head, a little gray ruin stands near the line.
This is Wraysholme Tower, formerly a fortified house, belonging to the knightly family of Harrington, of Aldingham Castle, in Low Furness.
The town of Aldingham belonged to this family in 1346.
Both town and castle have long since been swept away by the sea.
There is more than one legend connected with this ancient tower.
The legend of" The Last Wolf," is given in the" Remains of John Briggs," editor of the old Lonsdale Magazine.
This tradition has been put into spirit-stirring verse, by an anonymous writer, who contributed it to the Ulverstone Advertiser a few years ago.
The following will give the reader some idea of the story. "
The sun hath set on Wraysholme's tower, and over broad Morecambe's Bay; The moon out her eastern bower Pursues the track of day. "
On Wraysholme's white and massive walls, On rocky Humphrey Head, On wood and field her silver falls, Her silent charms are shed. "
No sound through all the sleeping plain Now breaks upon the ear, Save murmurs of the distant main, Ot evening breezes near. "
The woodman in his lovely cot, Has thrown his bill aside, The serf forgets his bitter lot, The fuedal chief his pride " But hark!
what sudden shout is that?
What glaring lights are those, That from yon turret scare the bat, And break the night's repose? "
Within those walls may now be seen The festive board displayed; And round it many a knight, I ween, And many a comely maid.
"The story goes on to tell how that in the proud old days of Wraysholme, Sir Edgar Harrington had sworn to hunt down the last wolf" in England's spacious realm," whose haunt was the woody height of Humphrey Head, and whose prey the flocks and herds of Wraysholme.
On the eve of the chase Sir Edgar held a mighty carousal at the tower among his retainers and noble guests.
During the feast he swore that the last wolf should" grace the conqueror's helm," and also that - " Whoever that wolf should quell, Should have his fair niece for a bride, And half his lands as well."
The orphan lady Adela, old Sir Edgar's ward, with jet black hair of glossy sheen, and bright hazel eyes, was beloved of all the country around; but her heart and troth were with a gallant young knight of the name of Harrington, Sir Edgar's son, who, having fled to shun his father's wrath, was supposed to be dead in foreign lands.
He seems, however, to have turned up at this great hunting feast just in time, after winning honour against the swarthy Saracen, disguised under the title of Sir John Delisle, in whim, nevertheless, the old retainers of Wraysholme see that - " A long lost wanderer meets their sight, Whatever his name be now" But, as usual, there are cross purposes in this old tale of love and chivalry, for Layburne, another brave knight, and the friend of Sir Edgar, sits by the board close suitor for the fair lady, though" from her should abhorred."
The knight drives on in song and jest, and brimming goblets, " Till late, with plenteous cheer oppressed, And foaming tankards drowned, The revellers retire to rest, And silence sinks around " At length the stars begin to pale, And dewy morning cold, Unfurls over distant Silverdale His flag of gray and gold.
"Old Hubert's horn awakes the sleepers to a mighty hunting. "
Full threescore riders mount with speed, - Amidst them Layburne strides A gallant steed of Flemish breed, That well his weight abides. "
Whilst mounted in an Arab white, Of figure light and free Rides young Delisle, the stranger knight, All wrapt in mystery.
"The huntsman leads the gallant company up to the wolf's covert on Humphrey Head.
The dogs get the track of their grisly prey, and a brave chase begins. "
Over Kirket breast the quarry flies.
To Holker's sheltering brakes, Then daunted by the hunter's cries, To distant Newby takes. "
It swims the Leven's brawling flood, Through Lowick's woodland scours, Threads Torber's dreary solitude, And seeks the Old Man's bowers.
"Here, the" gray beast" finds brief shelter in the recesses of the mountain, and the hunters pause.
But their hounds are staunch, and their horses as good as ever broke cover or dashed through a wood.
The dogs are on the track of the panting savage once more, and away they fly through woodland glens, and over the wild hills, in clamorous dash, - " Away by Esthwaite's lonely deep, Begirt by forests hoar, With many a merry shout they sweep Along its sylvan shore. "
Till by the foeman neared apace, And sped by thirst and fear, Through Sawrey's pass, the panting chase Strikes off to Windermere " There, where the shore of Lancashire Doth in the lake expand, To meet yon point projecting near, Of rocky Westmoreland, " With one bold plunge the mere he takes, And favoured by the wind, The blabbing scent abruptly breaks, And leaves his foes behind.
"The rival knights.
Layburne and Delisle, follow," foremost of the dripping train," and win the eastern side of the lake.
Two tireless bloodhounds keep the scent, and the chase continues along the shore to" craggy Gummerhow."
" Then turns aside to Witherslack, Where Winster's waters range, And thence to shingly Aggerslack, And sand-surveying Grange."
The doomed brute now makes, with the instinct of despair, for his old shelter on Humphrey Head, but as mild evening sinks upon the scene, the fatal hounds are on his track - and he is driven madly towards a wild chasm, " Begirt by rock on every side, That slopes in shade away."
Wolf and dogs rush over the steep.
Layburne's horse starts back from the awful chasm; but impetuous Delisle spurs on, and his fiery steed sweeps to destruction down the shouldered crag like a flash of lightening - " The shingles in its headlong course With rattling din give way, The hazels snap beneath its force, The mountain savins away."
At this terrible crisis the fair Adela chances to be pacing the hollow glen on her light palfrey, when the wolf appears in sight, and" bares his glistening teeth."
" Her eyes are closed in mortal dread, And over a look they steal, The wolf and Arab both lie dead, And scatheless stands Delisle " Full promptly from the slaughtered prey, He plucks the reeking spear, And cries,' Oh beauteous Adela, Behold thy true love here!
'"Sir Edgar now appears, and discovering in Delisle his lost son, welcomes him affectionately, and gives him the bride of his heart.
By blessed hap the Prior of Cartmel is on his way" to drink at the Holy well," and he consents to perform the marriage ceremony at once in the neighbouring cavern. "
And hence that cave on Humphrey Hill, Where these fair deeds befell, Is called Sir Edgar's chapel still, As hunters wot full well. "
And still that holy fount is there, To which the Prior came; And still it boasts its virtues rare, And bears its ancient name. "
And long on Wraysholme's lattice light A wolf's head might be traced, In honour of the redcross knight, Who bore it for his crest. "
In Cartmel church his grave is shewn, And over it, side by side, All graved in stone, lies brave Sir John, And Adela his bride.
"Such is the legend of" The Last Wolf," connected with this ruined tower of Wraysholme, the ancient abode of the Harringtons of Aldingham, in Low Furness.
I find that, forty years ago, the place was sheltered by clumps of old trees.
These are now gone, and what remains of the tower is a mere outhouse to the neighbouring farmstead.
Cark is the nearest station to Holker, the Duke of Devonshire's Cartmel seat.
Holker Hall belongs to the middle of the sixteenth century, when it was the residence of a branch of the ancient family of Preston, of Preston Patrick, in Westmorland.
About a century ago this beautiful estate came into the possession of the Cavendish family.
The park is full of rich sylvan landscapes, and it contains many noble trees, and trees of very rare kinds.
There are delightful walks on the woodland heights behind the park, which command good views of Leven Water, Thurston Vale, the mountains at the head of Windermere, and the Coniston range.
When the train clears Humphrey Head, the banks of the Leven estuary open beautifully in sight.
Wild, rich-hued limestone crags straggle up the north-east side, under overhanging woods, and the low shore is all fertile undulations.
The bold railway mole now crosses the Ulverstone Sands, and we rumble over a lofty viaduct, where the broad Leven rolls wild and turbid below, as if glad to escape from this daring evidence of man's enterprise, to the uncontrollable sea beyond.
The views from the line as we cross these sands are peculiarly fine, for this estuary is perhaps the most picturesque of any in Morecambe Bay.
Westward, Birkrigg rises above the rich woods and glades of Conishead Priory.
Nearer we see the white village of Sandside, opposite to which, about a mile from the shore, is that interesting little isle of prayer, called" Chapel Island," with its old ruined chantry among the trees.
Behind Sandside, the gray smoke of Ulverstone hovers above the valley at the foot of" Hoad Hill."
The traveller may know this hill by the lighthouse-shaped monument on the top.
Further along the shore there is a little cluster of shipping at the port of Ulverstone.
The low grounds beyond are, first great tracts of yellow sand, then pleasant holms and valleys; behind these, woody uplands and lofty moors filling the rear of the landscape.
The extreme northward view of the estuary is bounded by the fells of Cartmel, rising peak after peak.
Looking eastward, the shore is a beautiful combination of rock and wildwood, with the great ridge of Hampsfell peeping over the promontory of Humphrey Head.
The Ulverstone Sands are considered more dangerous than those on the Lancaster side.
Mr. Baines, speaking of the old route over this estuary says: -" The track is from Holker Hall to Plumpton Hall, keeping Chapel Island a little to the left; and the mind of the visitor is filled with a mixture of awe and gratitude, when, in a short time after he has traversed this estuary, almost dry-shod, he beholds the waters advancing into the bay, and bearing stately vessels towards the harbour of Ulverstone, over the very path which he has so recently trodden."
The priory of Conishead was anciently charged with the cost of guides across this estuary.
So dangerous were these sands considered, that on" Chapel Island," about a mile west of the line, the old monks of Furness built the small chapel, where prayers were daily offered" for the safety of the souls of such as crossed the sands with the morning tide."
There are still some remains of this ancient chapel, which gave its name to the island; and, though" long years have darkened into time" since the prayers of the church were heard there, no man can walk about in this little seaworn solitude without feeling that something of the interest of its ancient associations lingers there still.
The island is now a favourite resort of pleasure seekers, who cross at low water from the village of Sandside, about a mile distant - and, even in that short distance, sometimes meet with disaster, The three miles over Leven sands must have been destructively dangerous, for," according to a petition from the Abbot of Furness, in 19 Ed.
2, the number of sixteen at one time, and six more at another, were sacrificed in this way; and in order to eschew the great mortality of the people of Furness on passing the sands at the ebb of the tide, he prayed that he should have a view of frankpledge and a coroner of his own; for everywhere," he says," it would be the salvation of one soul at least."
The train is now quitting the sands, and we draw near to Ulverstone town.
Long strings of carriages go by, heavily laden with the rich iron ore of Furness.
I was told that the mines of this district now produce between seven and eight hundred thousand tons of the finest in England, every year.
Thirty years ago, old captain Barrow, of Ulverstone, carried all the iron ore got in Furness in one small vessel.
This captain barrow was cousin to Sir John Barrow, late secretary to the Admiralty, whose monument stands on the top of" Hoad," the great round hill, at the right hand side of the line as we run over the railway bridge towards Ulverstone.
Sir John was born, of very humble parentage, in a little cottage at Dragley Beck, near this town.
Chapter The Third " About me round I saw Hill, dale and shady woods, and sunny plains, And liquid lapse of murmuring streams; by these, Creatures that lived, and moved, and walked, or flew, Birds on the branches warbling; all things smiled; With fragrance and with joy my heart overflowed."
Milton The view of Ulverstone and the country about it, as seen from the high road near the station, is very picturesque.
The town is pleasantly situated in a vale, on the shores of the Leven estuary, among the hills of Low Furness; and it stands at convenient distances from so many points of interest, that I took up headquarters at the well-known Sun Hotel, in the market-place.
From hence I made daily excursions into the neighbourhood; and one of my first rambles was to Swathmoor, about a mile from the town.
Swathmoor Hall was, for many years, the residence of George Fox, founder of the Society of Friends.
Leaving Ulverstone by the south road, about two hundred yards past the railway station, a bye-path leads over the fields on the right hand a little way, then down into a shady dell, through which a clear rivulet plays its moody music, running out of sight again at the south end, under thick low-lapping branches, which gaze into it and dally with its silvery ripples, as if in live with this limpid minstrel, whose song softens into silence in the woods beyond.
This quiet dell is a fairy chapel of sylvan beauty, where the ceaseless hymn of nature is seldom disturbed by other sounds.
In the deepest part of the hollow, and old tone bridge, shaded by tall trees, crosses the stream; from thence a rugged footpath climbs the opposite fields, and in about a quarter of a mile, leads close by the rear of a hoary pile of stone outhouses, or rude appearance.
The road may be miry, but whoever he be that goes that way, in rain or fair weather, let him linger there a breathing while, for the old house in front of these buildings is Swarthmore Hall, the residence of George Fox.
On my first visit, I wandered about some time before I could find any human creature astir.
A contemplative charm seems to lie upon all around.
The house is a large, irregular, Elizabethan building, with nothing grand about it, save the impressive memories of the great reformer who dwelt in it two centuries ago.
The doorways are small; some of the windows are built up; and it has altogether a bald appearance, considering its size and former importance.
But the home of the persecuted puritan still looks over those quiet fields with a kind of ascetic solemnity, as if it was mingling dreams of the past with a patient waiting for the result of slow decay.
I wandered about the rough, cattle-trodden yard, among mire, and straw, and farming-gear, yet all was still, except a few ducks dabbling in a muddy pool, and a peaceful dog that roamed about outhouses, regardless of my presence.
There was no sign of life even about the windows.
At last, I came to a kind of kitchen at the rear of the hall, where I found the mistress of the house and her servants, throng at their washing.
When I had explained the purpose of my visit, the mistress pointed to a rude gate at the end, which opened to the front of the hall.
I went through and found myself in a little green paddock, where there was not even one rose left" to mark where a garden had been."
There, were the principal windows, - one little window looking out from George Fox's study; the other two were old-fashioned bay windows, much larger.
From the uppermost of these windows Fox used to preach, sometimes, to his friends in the garden below.
Near the bay window is the little old doorway, to which two rude stone steps lead up.
All else was plain and unpretending; and all other windows in the lower part of the frontage were built up.
Inside, I was shewn the" hall," a quaint, flagged apartment, on the ground floor, with a great old-fashioned fire-place, and a kind of stone dais in the recess of the mullioned window.
Here, I was told, the earliest meetings of the" Friends" were held.
From this room, two steps led up to the little sanctuary which was Fox's study; and I felt as if every footfall there was an intrusion; for that dim-lighted room, with its tiny lattice and quaint furniture, was the cell of a saint," of whom the world was not worthy."
His bed has been removed from its ancient apartment into a room where the farm servants sleep; and I was told that his Bible is now in the posses - sion of a lady belonging to the society of Friends, in Ulverstone.
Before Fox married this pious widow of Judge Fell, he was once dragged from this house and imprisoned all night in Ulverstone, under guard of fifteen men, some of whom were perched in the fire-place, for fear he should fly up the chimney, and so escape.
From thence he was removed to Lancaster Castle, where he suffered a long imprisonment.
George Fox seemed to have turned Ulverstone and the country about it upside down in those days, preaching in all sorts of pulpits and private houses, and sometimes in the open market-place.
He was once shamefully maltreated in the churchyard of St. Mary's, at Ulverstone, after preaching to the congregation there.
About a quarter of a mile west of the hall there is a plain substantial chapel, - the first chapel of the disciples of George Fox, - built at his own cost, in 1688.
It stands in a little flagged enclosure, surrounded by a stone wall about nine feet high.
The white door of the yard was open when I saw it, and the" Friends" were met within, - yet there was no sound, but that of the sea-breeze whistling over the fields of Swathmoor.
Above the entrance was this inscription, plainly graven," Ex dono, G. F., 1688."
At the western end of the chapel there is a croft, which was presented with the chapel, for the accommodation of the horses of such Friends as came from a distance.
About a mile west of Fox's chapel, a byeway leads into the old Roman road, at a place where a tesselated pavement was found a few years ago.
A mile further in the same direction brings us to the bleak summit of" Birkrigg," which commands a new and extensive prospect of the bay, and its north and eastern shores.
The pretty village of Bardsea is full in sight, at the foot of the hill.
On the southern slope of this rocky moorland there is a small Druidical Temple, - a circle of nine hoary stones, which, with one exception, are still more or less upright.
A quarter of a mile west of this relic of British history, and near an antique farmhouse, called" Sunbreak," there is a lonely burial-ground, looking out towards sea.
This is the oldest graveyard of the Society of Friends.
It is surrounded by a high stone wall, and carefully kept in order.
The door is generally locked, but I found it simply fastened with a staple and chain, and a wooden peg.
The interior contains no visible commemoration of the dead; but a thick swathe of the greenest grass covers the whole area, save on the higher side, where picturesque fragments of limestone rock, rising above the rich herbage, are so beautifully bemossed here and there, that it seems as if nature, in her quiet, lovely way, had taken in hand to keep the memories of these nameless tenants of the dust forever green.
There was something more touchingly beautiful, more suggestive of repose, in the recordless silence of this lone graveyard of the persecuted puritan, than in any cemeteries adorned with grand efforts of monumental art - which so oft intrude upon the solemnity of death things sullied by the vanities of the living.
The sacred simplicity of the spot made one feel more deeply how sound they slept below, in that unassailable shelter from the hurtful world.
The very sea-breeze seemed to pause there, and pass over this place of unawaking dreamers in a kind of requiem-hush.
Gleaston Castle is about six miles from Ulverstone.
The direct road to it lies through the old village of Urswick.
At the end of this village there is a fine tarn close by the highway.
The people of Urswick Vale have a legend that the ruins of an ancient town lie beneath the waters of this town.
Near Urswick, there is a small monastic ruin of Bolton Chapel, standing in a farm-yard, by the road, and now used as a cow-house.
Leaving this village, we pass Redmond Hall, the seat of a family once known in English History.
About a mile from Gleaston Castle, in a hollow of the fields, on the left hand side of the road, there is a pretty little sheet of water, called Mere Tarn, swarming with pike.
The castle originally consisted of four square towers, connected by strong curtain walls, defending an enclosure, the length of which seemed to me about one hundred yards.
One of these towers has disappeared, and the other three are more or less ruinous; but the summits of the two may yet be easily ascended by the stone steps which wind up the thickness of the massive walls.
In its palmy days this castle must have looked imposing in the heart of the little vale, where it seems to have been placed more for shelter and seclusion than for anything commanding in position.
It was built by the Flemings, lords of the ancient manor of Much Land.
The possesions of Michael le Fleming were the only lands in all Furness exempted from the grant made by Stephen, Earl of Bologne and Moreton, to Furness Abbey.
The name of this Michael, which the natives pronounce" Mickle," still clings to old associations in this neighbourhood, as in the case of" Michael's Well."
I remember how, on that breezy day, when, with two friends, I visited the ruins of this castle, as we were casting about Gleaston in hungry search of a dinner, we found this old well in a mossy corner at the entrance of the village.
The stones about it were worn by the footing of many generations, and the water was so clear that I could have seen a single thread of a lady's hair at the bottom of it.
I remember too, that when we were beginning to despair of finding anything like substantial refreshment, we met with it at the very last house at the western edge of the village, a clean little hostelry, where we got an excellent dinner of eggs and bacon, cheese, ale, pickles, salad fresh from the garden behind the house, and three quarts of butter milk; in addition to which, I had my shoe mended; and we were treated with more than common civility, and for the low charge of three and sixpence, - which was received with satisfaction.
The way of the shoe business was this, - I had burst the seam of it, and it was getting squashy with wet, for we had a delightfully rough tramp over moss and fell, and through miry bye-roads, that day.
The good wife at the alehouse offered to get it mended for me whilst dinner was cook - ing.
The old man lent me a shoe of his own to put on meanwhile.
It was as hard as an iron pot; in fact, it had a considerable weight of iron work about it, and for any rough work, I thought that that one shoe was worth at least four pair such as mine.
With one foot handicapped in this clog of iron and leather, I amused myself with walking about the clean floor, listening to the difference of sound in my footsteps, which went" fuzz, clang - fuzz, clang," reminding me of the three bells of a little country church that I have heard of, one of which was sound, the next cracked, and the third mended with leather, - their united music amounting to a kind of" ding, dang, puff."
The shoe came back mended before dinner was over, and a thrill of returning comfort went through my frame when I got it on, for I had felt as if walking with a wet dish-cloth round my foot a while before.
As we returned through the village, one of my friends proposed we should just look in upon a relation of his, an old shoemaker and a quaint man, well versed in the folk lore of the district.
He then lead us up to one of the most comfortable-looking cottages ever saw.
The floor was as clean as a plate just laid down for dinner, the place smelt as sweet as a herb stall, and all the polishable metal things shone like pools of water in moonlight.
The cheerful old wife, whose ruddy face was bedded in a snowy old-fashioned cap, and whose eyes, in spite of age and spectacles, looked as bright as the stars on a frosty night, rose from her arm-chair, and hobbled about with her crutch, smiling and talking, and talk - ing and smiling, as if she did n't know exactly what to do to shew that she was very fain.
At last, opening the door of the inner room, where the hearty old fellow and his son sat at work, she said" What, dinnet ye see wha's here?"
Dropping his hammer, and brushing the dirt from his leather apron, the old man rose above six feet into the air, pushed up his spectacles, and shouted," Why, it never is, sewer!
It cannot be reightly can it!
It's nowt i' the warld else, aw declare!
Well, this is a capper, hooivver!
What, yeere right good stuff for sore even mon!
Whatever quarter's the wind in, at yeere blawn this gate on?
Well, cum, cum; sit ye daan and let's mak use o' ye while ye are here."
" Ye hevn't hed yeere teea, aw warnd," said the good wife.
But we were already primely filled with good things, and no other feast could have been so delightful as the genial welcome which the old couple gave us.
The day, too, was waning with an uncertain sky, and we had several miles to go.
As we sat talking with the old man, a fine pair of new double-soled shooting boots stood at my elbow.
I took them up, and asked what such a pair would cost.
He said they could n't be done like them under a pound. "
But," said he," ye sud ha' sin a shoe that I stitched abaat an haar sing, for some poor tramp.
I nivver see a warse made shoe i' my life, I think.
An' he could n't hev hed' em lang nawther, -'t leater wur so fresh."
As he went on talking, I slowly lifted my foot till it fairly came into his sight. "
Hello!"
said he, with a confused gaze," What, wor it yaar shoe!"
It was. "
Well, then," replied he," all at I can say is, at yer wit's' s a deeal better nor yer understanding!"
We had a good deal of gleeful talk with the old folk; after which six miles' walk in a high wind through the vale of Urswick brought us to Ulverstone, at the edge of dark, well pleased with our day's ramble.
Conishead Priory is rather more than a mile south of Ulverstone.
There is a good road through the finest part of Conishead Park to the pretty village of Bardsea, which village is about three miles from Ulverstone.
The road goes near the princely mansion, the sea of H. W. Askew, Esq., which stands upon the site of the ancient priory.
The entrance hall retains some relics of the old monastic buildings.
About a mile beyond the priory, Bardsea Hall stands at the right hand side of the road, in a sheltered spot under the woods, and almost hidden from the traveller by a high wall.
This quaint building was erected by the Molyneux family as a hunting seat, and is supposed to occupy the site of the ancient hospital of Bardsea, the oldest ecclesiastical establishment in Furness.
This religious house was in existence in the latter part of the eleventh century, and had disappeared before the foundation of Conishead Priory.
The best view of the Priory, and its beautiful park scenery, is from the summit of the woods behind Bardsea Hall.
Bardsea takes its name from the British word," Bertesig," a place of thickets, as it appears in Doomsday Book.
The village is pleasantly situated on a green eminence sloping gently to the sands.
The woods, and dells, and quiet shore of this pretty sea-side nook, are full of pleasant walks.
There is an antique mansion called" The Well House," which is an object of interest.
In the village there are two respectable inns, and I found comfortable fare at the Cavendish Arms, where the landlord, Mr. Gilchrist, a gallant, old, retired preventive officer, from Cumberland, delighted me with his tales of wild adventure among the smugglers on the Scottish border, in" auld lang syne."
Aldingham is about three miles along the sea-side, west of Bardsea.
The road goes through the extensive plantations of" Seawood," the property of the Crown; and through the old village of Baycliffe.
The sea is either gleaming beautifully through the woods, or is in open sight, most of the way.
Aldingham Church looks lonely standing there in its little grave-yard by the sea, as if musing on the old Saxon town long since devoured by the hungry waters.
This was originally the parish church of the ancient manner of Much Land, which extended of the present Aldingham and Gleaston, and over several villages, such as Rhos, Lies, and Crimelton, which have been swallowed by the sea centuries ago.
Nothing now remains of them, but the account of their extent and value, preserved in the ancient records of Furness Abbey.
The church is all that is left of the town of Aldingham, the knightly residence and property of the Harringtons, one of which family, Lord le Harrington, died at the head of the Furness men, fighting for the Red Rose, at the battle of Wakefield.
The church retains some parts of the original building in its round pillars, and in one of the doorways.
The arms of the Harringtons appear in the east window.
The rectory stands close to the church; and the present rector is the Rev.
John Macaulay, brother of the famous historian and statesman.
Six miles by rail from Ulverstone, the magnificent ruins of Furness Abbey stand in the glen called" Bekanks Gill," or the vale of Deadly Nightshade, a sylvan seclusion, so cloistral in its character, that it might have been intended by nature to receive the grand pile, whose" bare ruined choirs" now lend such an impressive charm to the scene.
This famous abbey was endowed with extraordinary wealth and power; and its prelates were temporal princes, ruling with almost absolute sway over a district as large as the Isle of Man; and yet, those white-robed monks from Savigny, and their successors, were the humanising mediators between feudal tyranny and serfdom, in the rough old days.
I am told that the language of the common people of Furness still retains French words and idioms not found elsewhere in Lancashire, - lingering relics of the influence of the foreign ecclesiastics who ruled in this remote corner of England so long.
It would be easy to give an architectural description of the ruins from careful works already written, but I refrain, partly from want of room, and partly because the visitor can buy all that information for a trifle on the spot itself.
I may say, however, that in addition to the general effect, the high altar with its beautiful sedilia, the chapter-house, and the Abbot's private chapel, were particularly interesting to me.
Though this monastery has lost the grand proportions of its old completeness, it is still robed in beauty, that" sole permanence in being's ceaseless flow;" and kind nature is quietly claiming its remains for her own again.
It is a spot to linger in until the solemn beauty of it becomes an enduring treasure of the spirit.
Reading the ancient charter of its foundation, I was so struck with the beauty of one passage in it, that I think the reader will excuse me for repeating it here.
The words are as follows, from" West's Antiquities of Furness": -" In the name of the Blessed Trinity, and in honour of St. Mary of Furness, I, Stephen, Earl of Bologne and Moreton, consulting God, and providing for the safety of my own soul, the soul of my wife the Countess Matilda, the soul of my lord and uncle Henry King of England and Duke of Normandy, and for the souls of all the faithful, living as well as dead; in the year of our Lord 1127 of the Roman indiction, and the 5th and 18th of the Epact; considering every day the uncertainty of life, that the roses and flowers of kings, emperors, and dukes, and the crowns and palms of all the great, wither and decay; and that all things, with an uninterrupted course, tend to dissolution and death; I therefore return, give, and grant to God and St. Mary of Furness, all Furness and Walney," etc.
etc.
Dalton, the ancient capital of Furness, is about a mile from the abbey, and four from Ulverstone.
The Roman road from Maryport to Lancaster passes through this town, and it was the site of a Roman station( Galacum).
In Saxon times this town belonged to Earl Tosti.
Later, it was the manor court and market town of the abbots of Furness, the square tower of whose castle still looks with an antique frown upon the market-place.
Here the civil business of their vast possessions was transacted.
The courts baron of Dalton are still held in this tower.
Dalton church stands hard by the castle, near the edge of a steep rock, overlooking the Vale of Deadly Nightshade.
Romney, the painter, who was a native of this parish, lies buried in this graveyard, under a plain stone, bearing the name, dates, and the words," Pictor celeberrimus."
The parish of Dalton was almost depopulated by the great plague, two centuries ago.
In the church there is a massive old stone font, sculptured with the armorial bearings of the ancient lords of the district.
This venerable relic stood for some time in the churchyard, exposed to mutilation and wear of the elements, until, through the good taste of the Rev.
Mr. Morgan, the present vicar, it was removed to the interior again.
See note A. Peel Castle is about nine miles from Ulverstone, by rail, passing Furness Abbey, to Peel pier.
A boat may be had at the pier, to the island, which is immediately opposite, divided from the main land by a narrow channel.
Going by way of Barrow, the distance by rail is about twelve miles; but the route is more varied.
No other way of approaching the ruins of this fortress is so impressive as by boat from Barrow, which is easily obtained, especially if" civil old Joe Winder" be about.
This route also gives the tourist a good opportunity of seeing the harbour.
The isle of Walney, Rampside, and the most characteristic objects of this remote nook of the Furness shore, are in sight from the water.
Barrow itself is an interesting spot.
It is now the great port of Furness, and a place of increasing importance.
Here, most of the ore of the district is shipped for Carron and Swansea, where it is used to enrich the poorer ores of Scotland and Wales.
Hollingshed says that the Scots, in the reign of Edward the Second, during one of their raids into England," met with no iron worth their notice until they came to Furness, in Lancashire, where they seized all the manufactured iron they could find, and carried it off with the greatest joy, though so heavy of carriage, and preferred it to all other plunder."
In Barrow and its neighbourhood, as in many other parts of Furness, roads, houses, cattle, and men are more or less coloured with oxide of iron.
A Furness miner, when disguised in his Sunday clothes, is seldom slow to tell you that he has" taen his degrees i' the Red Lone College."
The view of Peel Castle, as the boat nears the island from Barrow, is very striking.
The castle was built by the Abbots of Furness, in the reign of Edward the Third, upon an older foundation, supposed to be the remains of a Danish fortress.
These fierce sea-rovers often ravaged this part of the coast, and the terrors of their name linger yet among its traditions.
The castle has been a place of much greater extent and strength than now appears.
On the eastern side of the island, where high tides wash the base of the ruins, immense blocks of wall, which have been many years among the water, are yet as firmly held together by their old cement as if they were solid rock.
On the east and southern sides, the sea now covers a great extent of the old foundations, which are visible, here and there, under water.
On the north and western sides, the two great ditches, the double lines of wall, and the strong flanking towers, still give some idea of the strength of the ancient defences.
Near the ruins, there are two cottages, where the only inhabitants of the island reside.
The largest of these cottages is a public-house, chiefly frequented by sailors.
Here the visitor may get good plain fare.
Coniston Lake is about an hour's ride by rail from Ulverstone, on the Furness and Ulverstone line.
The line goes by Kirkby, the town of Broughton, Woodlands, and Torver; and then along the western bank of the lake, with the" Old Man" and other Coniston mountains rising up from the left hand side.
The station is at Coniston village, near the head of the lake.
This line runs a considerable distance by Duddon Sands, commanding an extensive view of the estuary.
Whoever desires to see Coniston Waterwell, should see it on a fine summer's evening from Lake Bank at the foot.
Newby Bridge, at the foot of Windermere, is nine miles from Ulverstone.
A coach starts thither from the latter place every day in summer.
The road is full of interesting variety, winding by the banks of the River Leven almost all the way.
On the right hand, the upper part of the estuary stretches out from near the highway, bounded by the fells and beautiful shores of Cartmel; on the left, the green hills of Low Furness throw their shadows, here and there, across the way.
The River Leven brings down the waters of Windermere to the sea.
About four miles on the road, the beautiful valley of the Crake opens up on the western side, and the summits of the Coniston into the Leven.
If any sojourner at Ulverstone desires a fine walk through picturesque scenery, let him go about two miles along this high road from Ulverstone, then up Newland Vale about a mile, and then northwards across the hills a mile and a half, down to the village of Penny Bridge, at which spot he may be safely left to the influence of the scene.
From these high grounds, between Newland Vale and Crake Vale, there are glorious views of the Coniston mountains.
Near the entrance of the Crake Valley the road passes the picturesque little village and port of Greenodd, in a nook of the estuary.
A short distance from Greenodd, over the hills, there is an interesting old Baptist chapel, built in the intolerant days of the" Five Mile Act."
At Backbarrow - where a stranger may be surprised to find a cotton-mill in such a spot - the River Leven falls over the rocks beautifully, on the right hand-side of the road.
Thence, to Newby Bridge, the road lies through a delightful woodland scene between the hills, with the river shining and singing all the way over its old bed of mossy rocks, down on the left hand.
The old mansion-like inn, called the White Swan, is delightful situated by the clear Leven side.
In front of the house, a quaint bridge of five arches spans the stream, and a few yards below, the river runs over a little fall, filling the quiet vale with its drowsy song.
Above the bridge, the water comes down from Windermere through lovely scenery, gradually narrowing from a lake to a river, with the current of water scarcely discernible.
The picturesque old inn, the bridge, the river, the drowsy fall, the choral woods, and every object in the hollow of this green nest of the mountains, is full of beauty and repose; and the hills that shut them in from the rest of the world heighten the general charm.
The clear river glides by the front of the inn, with only the road between.
It is pleasant to sit at the upper windows, or on the green flower-garnished benches below, on a summer evening, listening to the birds and the waterfall, and watching the fish leaping up from the water, as if giving a last frolic defiance to the cook at the White Swan.
At Newby Bridge we are on the very doorstep of that beautiful region of England - the Lake Country - and " All that creation's varying mass assumes Of grand, or lovely, here aspires and blooms; Bold rise the mountains, rich the gardens glow, Bright lakes expand, and conquering rivers flow."
Perhaps the finest views to be had in the immediate neighbourhood of Newby Bridge are from the summit of Finsthwaite, a lofty wooded height, which rises steeply a little westward of the inn.
On the top there is a square tower of slate stone, commemorative of the naval victories of England.
The inside walls are written all over with names and nameless rhymes.
The key of the tower may be had at the White Swan.
A footpath leads through the plantations to the summit, which is a singular mixture of craggy wildness and pretty woodland walks.
Finsthwaite commands a glorious extent and variety of scenery in this land of lake and mountain.
Southward, the vale of the Leven winds away to Ulverstone Sands; westward, the mountains of Coniston; eastward, the fells and vales of Cartmel; and northward, from the foot of the hill, the entire length of crystal Windermere, dotted with its emerald isles, is in full view.
Beyond, the most kingly cluster of all our English mountains bounds the landscape.
Green is" the favourite colour of God," and the green shores of this garden-girt lake are of a brightness such as is rarely met with elsewhere in the world.
Looking upon Windermere from Finsthwaite, on a sunny day, one may say, in the words of Tom Moore, that nature seems to have lavished her charms upon that scene - " To make a heaven for love to sigh in, For bards to live and saints to die in."
The distance from Newby Bridge to Kendal, by way of Cartmel Fells, is ten miles; by Leven Bridge, fifteen miles.
An omnibus goes from the inn twice a day in summer through Cartmel to meet the trains at the village of Grange.
Steamers start daily in summer to Ambleside and back, calling at Bowness.
There are ample facilities for boating and fishing; and, in addition to this, I believe there is hardly a house of entertainment in the lake country more notable for genuine comfort, that the White Swan at Newby Bridge.
Seaside Lakes And Mountains Of Cumberland.
Chapter The First. "
Here, rivers in the sea are lost; There, mountains to the skies are tost; Here, tumbling billows mark the coast With surging foam."
Burns.
Of all out English lake scenery no part is less known than that which skirts the sea, from the ruins of Peel in Furness, to Whitehaven in Cumberland; and there is none which less deserves neglect.
Shut out on the east by England's wildest mountains, and on the west by the Irish Channel, this region was, till lately, more difficult of approach than any other quarter of that picturesque land.
Tourists have made fitful trips to its retired lakes and glens, but have seldom wandered far there, or remained long enough to drink in the spirit of its varied scenery.
Taking the beaten track of imitative sight-seers, they have climbed out of Borrowdale into Buttermere; and after eating char at the" Fish," and talking over the legend of the vale, they have gone in a boat across Crummock Water, to look at Scale Force - the lady of English waterfalls.
They have followed mountain guides over craggy wildernesses down to the lone hamlet at Wastdale Head; from whence they have, perhaps, ascended Scawfell.
The mountain tops have shewn green valleys winding to westward, lighted here and there by the glimmer of a clear river's" sweet meander," with the blue sea heaving beyond; but, after a hasty glance at some of the great features mentioned in guide-books, they have generally turned again to more familiar haunts of tourist life, content to believe that what they were leaving unexplored must be uninteresting, because comparatively little known.
But he who wanders lovingly in that cabinet land between the mountains and the main, will find it full of natural variety, from the wildest mountain sublimity to soft pastoral vales whose beauty melts into the sea.
One charm peculiar to this remote part of the Lake District is, that the ocean lips its western border, stretching grandly to the horizon's edge save where the outlines of Mona's historic isle stand out from the waves.
The voice of the sea floats up its green valleys, as if to woo their wandering waters home.
Some of these rivers are of rare beauty, such as the Duddon - that darling stream of Wordsworth's lay - the Esk, the Irt, the Ehen, and the Calder, - whose tranquil murmurs mingled so long with the monastic chants of its secluded vale.
I do not know a better clue to the finest features of the district than its water-courses afford.
They abound in scenes delightful to the painter's eye.
From the shore, where they glide into the sea, they lead through green holms and vales; under shady woods; by quaint hamlets and bowery nooks; between craggy banks, festooned with greenery; now stealing silently over level sands; but mostly, in glittering frolic, among picturesque beds of mossed rock: till they come to where lone lakes lie among savage mountains, down whose steeps tributary cascades leap from their wild birthplace.
This district is no less remarkable for the associations of history than for its natural charms, its mineral wealth, and its interest to men of science.
Furness Abbey, Peel Castle, and Gleaston Castle, although on the Lancashire side of the Duddon, naturally belong to this sea-coast part of lake-land.
In addition to these, it has, for its extent, a more than common share of the relics of antiquity.
The beautiful ruin of Calder Abbey, in its monastic vale; the old conventual church of St.
Bees; the Runic crosses of Beckrmont and Gosforth; the remains of Egremont and Millom Castles; the legendary hall of Muncaster, looking down from its shady height upon lovely Eskdale's stream; Broughton Tower, and many others of less note.
From the time when Druid priests worshipped in the temple at Swinside, and Roman soldiers marched from camp to camp among these hills, till now, this tract of country possesses interesting relics of every race which has left a name in our history.
Since the opening of the new line from Ulverstone to Whitehaven the district has been gradually becom - ing better known.
The train from Ulverstone calls at Furness Abbey; then crossing the Duddon estuary, winds round the base of Black Coomb up to Ravenglass; after which it clips the sea so closely for more than ten miles, that one might fling a stone from the carriage window into the waves at high water.
At St.
Bees the line quits the shore, and shoots through a fertile valley to the port of Whitehaven.
To an island man, this is a singularly interesting journey.
On the one hand the open sea, with here and there a spot - as a Seascale - which seems destined by nature to become a favourite bathing place; on the other hand, the grand outlines of the mountains, always in sight, yet always changing in relative appearance as we roll along.
As a sequel to my recent wanderings in Cartmel and Furness, I propose now the reader with me through some parts of this district, where I rambled last year, first in summer, then at the fall of the leaf, when vegetation, like the setting sun, puts on its grandest robe to die in.
My first trip was in summer, from Ulverstone to Black Coomb, the general character and position of which is finely described in the following lines of a poem called" The Minstrels of Windermere": - " Close to the sea, lone sentinel, Black Coomb his forward station keeps: He breaks the sea's tumultuous swell, - And ponders over the level deeps.
He listens to the bugle-horn Where Eskdale's lovely valley bends; Eyes Walney's early fields of corn; Sea Birds to Holkner's woods he sends.
Beneath his feet the sunk ship rests In Duddon Sands, its masts all bare."
It was one of those cool bright mornings that give the heart a pleasant fillip.
The quaint town of Ulverstone was yet asleep; and, as I looked out of my bedroom window, some public clock chimed a quarter past six, in tones which rang through the streets, and died away upon Leven Sands.
There had been a great storm of wind and rain during the night, but now, everything from the sky to the ground looked fresh and glad; and the old market-place was all still as a cloister, except where a few pigeons pecked and croodled about the cobble pavement, or a red hued iron miner went whistling through the sunshine, on his way to work.
At the station, I met my two friends, whom, for the nonce, I will call" Buckland" and" Sedgwick."
Stepping into the carriage we startled a bird, which had just flown in, but evidently had no desire to go any further by rail.
Half Past six.
We are off towards Black Coomb.
The handle of Buckland's geological hammer stuck out of his brown swinger, and he had a strong hempen wallet over his shoulder.
Sedgwick's shiny case for botanical specimens hung jauntily from a strap which crossed his breast; and he was accompanied by a most innocent-looking dog, of undefinable breed, called" Jack;" who seemed to take the rumble of the wheels for the growls of a thousand invisible enemies, whose close neighbourhood frightened him into silence.
Away through the smiling fields; past Lindal, the scene of a tussle in the Parliamentary war; past ancient Dalton, with its squat old tower upon the steep; through the green vale of Deadly Nightshade, to Furness Abbey, where a full choir of birds were making the ruins ring with their little matin songs.
Before we could satisfy ourselves with this beautiful scene, the train turned back a little to get upon the Whitehaven line, and, in a quarter of an hour, we were rolling along the shore of Duddon estuary, where the cool sea-breeze came freshly over tumbling waves.
Leaving Kirkby, with its great slate quarries on the moor side, we stop a Foxfield, and a few travellers get out to go forward on the Coniston line.
Yonder is the bold peak of the Old Man.
And here, a little to the right hand, is the town of Broughton, on a sunny slope.
But our line clings to the sea.
We rattle over the Duddon viaduct, and by two or three stations, in a quiet green country, where hamlets and scattered white cottages shew themselves upon the landscape.
Black Coomb has been long in sight; and now," Out here for Silecroft!"
which brings us to the very foot of that bold outpost of the mountains.
The journey had taken about an hour, and the morning air was cool.
There was a new inn near the station.
The front door was not yet open; but, seeing a red-armed girl cleaning steps at a little side entrance, we asked her if we could have breakfast.
Putting her floor-cloth down, she rose from her knees, looked at us wistfully, then wiped her hands on her apron, and said she would go and see.
Whilst she was upstairs, we peeped into the front rooms.
In one, the relics of a night carousal lay strewn about, looking sickly in the sunshine; the other was a clean little parlour, with pictures, music books, and a piano in it.
Here we waited till the girl brought word that breakfast would be ready in half an hour, and said we might stay in the room if we liked.
In a few minutes, footsteps were heard overhead; the landlady came down the stairs; and all the household began to stir.
We opened the window, and the morning air brought in sweet smells from gardens over the way.
On the mountain side, right opposite, we could see the gray line of our path up Black Coomb.
Sedgwick played the" Ranz des Vaches" from Rossini's" William Tell;" and here I may say that I do not know any bit of music that so beautifully breathes the spirit of the mountains.
We listened to it over and over again on that sunny morning, at the foot of Black Coomb, till it tuned our hearts to the pleasant business of the day.
After this, we went in to the garden, and talked with villagers who were lounging about, till the girl called out that breakfast was ready.
Our meal was good, and the charge moderate.
When it was over, we took time, and had another tune from our friend before starting.
I see from Mr. Linton's book, that there are some interesting, druidical remains below Black Coomb," lying scattered about in the vicinity of Annaside and Gutterby, near the sea-shore;" and, at Selkar's Bay, about a mile from the beach," it was said that the remains of several vessels or galleys could be seen until about the end of the last century, having, according to tradition, been sunk and left there on some invasion of the Romans."
The limited time did not admit of our exploring these things; but it is as well to mention them for the sake of those that come after.
The greatest part of Silecroft is opposite the hotel, in a hollow which divides the railway line from the first slope of Black Coomb.
There was nothing remarkable in it irregular white cottages, though they looked pleasant that morning, with flower pots in the windows here and there.
We walked through the village; and, about half a mile on the road beyond, struck over the right hand fields, to reach the path we had seen from the inn.
Droves of sheep and lambs were wending slowly up from different points; and about a quarter of an hour's ascent brought an interesting pastoral scene in view.
A glittering streamlet came tumbling down the mountain, and, in a dinge of the steep, its waters were dammed up by a rude stone enclosure, known in moorland districts as a" sheep-wash." At one end of this enclosure, a bleating crowd of sheep and lambs huddled in the shade of a stone field-wall.
These were let into the watery enclosure, one at a time, through a little square opening, where they were soused, and scrubbed, and swilled by the sturdy washers inside, and then let out, panting, frightened, and clean, through a similar opening on the opposite side.
Heavy, and dripping, to the breezy brow Slow move the harmless race; where, as they spread Their swelling treasures to the sunny ray, Inly disturbed, and wondering what this wild Outrageous tumult means, their loud complaints The country fill: and tossed from rock to rock, Incessant bleatings run around the hills."
As this went on, the water was continually refreshed by the in-flowing stream; and a little outlet at the lower end carried away its impurities.
Shouts and laughter of herdsmen, and the barking of dogs, came cheerily up the hill side; and the air was vocal with tremulous complainings of sheep and lambs, which, having passed through the" wash," wandered wildly about the heathy steep, chased to and fro by dogs.
The clear stream leaping by our pathway; the majestic mountain high above us; the beautiful bowery vale below; the blue sea hard by; the splendour of the morning; the stillness all around, save where this pastoral tumult rose; it was a scene that kept us gazing with delight.
But we had Black Coomb to climb, so we toiled slowly up the rough way, oft pausing to look back at the landscape.
This is the steepest part of the ascent from Silecroft; but our tricksy streamlet kept us pleasant company till about a thousand feet above the sea.
Here we came upon a bleak platform, where silent desolation reigned.
A better road now took a circuit over the expanse, afterwards making a white and winding line up to the summit.
From this point each chose a path which he thought would lead soonest to the top; and, half an hour's climbing found us together at a pile of stones left by the government surveyors.
All around us was a sombre wilderness strewn with slabs and splinters of Skiddaw slate.
No bird, nor bee, nor buzz of summer life was there.
When the cold strong wind lay still for a minute, the only sound heard was a low murmur of the sea breaking against the coast below.
There was nothing astir, but here and there a black-faced moorland tup, staring fiercely, as if half - inclined to dispute our strange intrusion.
Sometimes a cloud sailed overhead, putting us into gloomy shadow, and making the wilderness look wilder.
It was a strange sight, then, to watch the play of sun and shade upon the lower slopes, and to see the strong sunlight sleeping serenely on the green vale below.
The following lines may be interesting to the reader.
They were written by Wordsworth, with a slate pencil, upon a stone, on the side of this mountain: - Stay, bold adventurer; rest awhile thy limbs On this commodious seat!
for much remains Of hard ascent before thou reach the top Of this huge eminence - from blackness named - And, to far-travelled storms of sea and land, A favourite spot of tournament and war!
Be thee may no such boisterous visitants Molest; may gentle breezes fan thy brow: And neither cloud conceal, nor misty air Bedim, the grand terraqueous spectacle, From centre to circumference unveiled!
Know, if thou grudge not to prolong thy rest That, on the summit wither thou art bound, A geographic labourer pitched his tent, With books supplied and instruments of art, to measure height and distance; lonely task Week after week pursued!
To him was given Full many a glimpse( but sparingly bestowed On timid man), of nature's processes Upon the exalted hills.
He made report That once, while there he plied his studious work Within that canvas dwelling, suddenly The many - coloured map before his eyes Became invisible; for all around Had darkness fallen - unthreatened, unproclaimed, - As if the golden day itself had been Extinguished in a moment; total gloom, In which he sate alone, with unclosed eyes, Upon the blinded mountains silent top!"
The views from Black Coomb are of the grandest imaginable kind, both in variety and extent.
The sea fills all the west, and the mountain seems to arise sheer from its waves.
Eastward, a storm of mighty hills closes the scene.
Southward, and just under the eye, the woodland ridge of Millom shuts in a rich valley which fringes the base of Black Coomb with a verdant beauty.
Immediately beyond, the estuary stretches wide, where - " Majestic Duddon, over smooth flat sands, Glides on in silence, with unfettered sweep."
Farther south, green hills, rich vales, towns, towers, and gleaming rivers, as far as the eye can go.
Grand as our views were, the day was too hazy to see all that can be seen thence, when the atmosphere is favourable.
Further of the prospects this glorious eminence commands let Wordsworth speak once more, in a manner worthy of the theme: - " This height a ministering angel might select; For from the summit of Black Coomb( dread name Derived from clouds and storms!)
the amplest range Of unobstructed prospect may be seen Which British ground commands: low dusky tracts, Where Trent is nursed, far southward!
Cambrian hills To the south-west, a multitudinous show.
And in a line of eye-sight linked with these The hoary peaks of Scotland, that give birth To Teviot's stream, to Annan, Tweed, and Clyde; Crowding the quarter whence the sun comes forth, gigantic mountains, rough with crags; beneath, Right at the imperial station's western base Main ocean, breaking audibly, and streched Far into silent regions, blue and pale; And visibly engirding Mona's Isle, That, as we left the plain, before our sight Stood like a lofty monument, uplifting slowly( Above the convex of the watery globe) Into clear view the cultured fields that streak Its habitable shores; but now appears A dwindled object, and submits to lie At the spectators feet.
Yon azure ridge, Is it a perishable cloud - or there Do we behold the frame of Erin's coast?
Land sometimes by the roving shepherd swain( Like the bright confines of another world) Not doubtfully perceived.
Look homeward now!
In depth, in height, in circuit, how serene The spectacle - how pure!
Of nature's works, In earth, and air, and earth-embracing sea, A revelation infinite it seems; Display august of man's inheritance, Of Britain's calm felicity and power."
After lingering on the summit till the keen wind began to make us chill, we went round by the southern edge of the mountain, and, on the east side, came to a most impressive scene, called" The Screes," - a vast craggy amphitheatre, which geologists say is the crater of an ancient volcano.
With some difficulty we made way into the swampy hollow of this immense basin.
High up in an inaccessible part of the rocks, ravens were screaming, and wheeling about their wild eyrie.
That lofty sweep of blackened crags seemed to frown the landscape into silence, as I stood, lost in the gloomy profound, listening to the geological conversation of my two friends.
A curious, cone-shaped mound rises in the centre of the hollow.
The lower side, or lip of the basin, is broken off; and an extensive porphyry dike runs down into the southward vale.
In the same direction, the narrow gorge, through which we descended the valley, is watered by a wild stream, called" Witcham Mill," which fills the pass with turbulent glee, as it dashes over the rocks.
By the side of the stream, a good road brought us down to" Witcham Mill," a building quaintly worn with age, and sheltered deep in a nook by the water side, below" White Hall Knot."
Somehow, a corn mill seems to belong, naturally, to quietness and green country; and the sounds that arise therefrom mingle better with the sounds of wild birds and leafy rustlings of the woods than with the tumults of town life.
Sedgwick knew the miller well, so we walked about the building, in and out, with the cheerful old corn-crusher, whilst Buckland splashed through" Witcham Beck," and clambered about the ferny crags, in search of some rare plant that he knew of.
It was now long past noon.
Threatening clouds hung over us, and rain began to fall.
There was a little public-house a mile over the eastward fields, and we made haste to its friendly shade.
The house is kept by a staid old widow, who supplied us with bread and cheese, milk and butter - all her humble larder could afford - but it was very good.
The distance from this place to the druidical temple, at Swinside, as about four miles.
The shower soon ended, and all was bright again.
We took a path which winds about the south side of" White Hall Knot," and then through the hollow of a deep glen to the east, where a handsome lad was whipping small trout from the stream almost as fast as he could put bait on hook.
Leaving this road, Sedgwick led up the hills, where there was no trodden footing; - now through green swamps, that often turned us back; now through rough tracks of heather; now over stone walls, that rattled after us as we leaped down; now splashing through a watercourse; now labouring up a craggy steep; till at last, men and horses at work, and the gables of a farm-house came in sight on the distant hill-side.
The temple is near this lonely farm-house.
We had to climb a lofty wall into the great enclosure where it stands.
The day was glorious; and we sat down upon dry moss within the circle, resting our backs against one of its gray stones.
The temple is 285 feet in circumference; and consists of fifty - four moss-grown stones, some of which are prostrate, a few still nearly upright, and all slanting more or less in different directions.
Through a cleft in one of the largest blocks, a fine young rowan-tree or mountain ash, has pushed its way from the ground, spreading its branches over the venerable stone.
This sylvan hermit prefers the unsheltered hills to crowded woods and forests.
It was interesting to find this tree, which has been associated with the wildest superstitions of our island from time immemorial, hanging here so fresh and green, over the relics of the ancient temple.
From the" Forest Trees of Britain" I cull these words about it: -" Lightfoot and Gilpin are both of opinion that the mountain ash was held in high estimation by the Druids.
The former says,' It may be observed to grow more frequently than any other tree in the neighbourhood of those druidical circles of stones so often seen in the north of Britain; and the superstitious still continue to retain a great veneration for it, which was undoubtedly handed down to them from early antiquity.'
Often, at this day, a stump of it is found in some old burying place, or near the circle of a Druid temple, whose rites it formerly invested with its sacred shade."
A ancient song says - " Witches have no power Where there is roan-tree wood."
There is a kind of recess, or avenue, on the east side of the temple, composed of two stones on each side.
Buckland searched about till he found a curious fibrous plant, called" Druids hair," of which we brought some specimens away.
The sunset was glorious among those lonely mountains, as we came down, by another route, startling the red grouse from its heathery nest.
A delightful walk of a mile and a half brought us to a fine old farm-house, called" Crag Hall."
It was milking-time; but we rested a few minutes, and were kindly refreshed in that hospitable homestead; after which we set out again as the farewell light began to blend with evening shades, to the village of Green, through which a beautiful stream runs close by the highway.
The best way to the temple a Swinside is to get off at Green station, and go through the village, up to Crag Hall, where vehicles may be left; from whence a good road leads up a mile and a half, to the druidical circle.
As we came through Green, a strong sulky-looking dog rushed from under a passing cart, and seizing our poor canine friend" Jack," shook him like a rat.
But for the timely aid of a friendly cudgel or two, the poor brute would have been" nowhere" in a few minutes.
The station is a mile from the village.
We took the train here; and so returned to Ulverstone, well pleased with our days excursion to Black Coomb and the temple at Swinside.
Chapter The Second. "
A realm of mountain, forest haunt, and fell, And fertile valleys, beautifully lone; Where fresh and far romantic waters roam, Singing a song of peace by many a cottage home."
J. C. Prince It was autumn, the evening of the year, and summer's green had begun to pay its annual tribute to decay.
I set my mind on a stroll through that part of the lordship of Millom which occupies the north bank of Duddon estuary, and forms the southern part of Cumberland.
Near the shore it looks rather bleak, but there is a charm about the sea which never palls; and here, at the foot of a glorious mountain land, the spirits rise breezily in barometrical sympathy with nature.
As we go eastward, the country is all picturesque ups and downs, and pleasant nooks of rural life, and the land is richer and better wooded.
I chose this route partly because I wished to see Milton Castle, the ruined fortress of the Boyvilles and Huddlestones, lords of great power there in ancient times.
The nearest station from Ulverstone to the castle is Holborn Hill, from whence there is a picturesque road along the estuary to Broughton In-Furness, about seven miles distant.
The view from Buckman's Hall, the highest point of this road, is worth journey.
I had been spending two hours at midday with a friend at Furness Abbey, where he had shewn me that the finest view of that noble ruin is from the summit of the valley's eastern bank; up to which neat gravel walks lead, with rustic resting places by the way.
At two we left for Holborn Hill, on the Whitehaven line.
When we came to Duddon Sands the air was unusually clean, and the heather flower in full glow along the line.
From the station, Millom Castle is visible among a clump of trees about a mile eastward.
The high road goes by it.
The village of Holborn Hill was a little on the left, and, from what I could see, it is simply one street or rural cottages, mostly whitewashed.
There is something instructive about the old names of places in England, but the new title given to this village is far away from the character of the place and the scenery around.
As we drew near the gray walls of Millom, all was sunny and still, and a few tall trees threw their shadows across the road.
There was a little round-faced lad loitering by the hedge with a switch in his hand.
We asked him what house that was. "
It's the castle," said he. "
What castle?"
" Aa dinner knaa."
" Who lives at it?"
" Yon man, yonder," replied he, pointing to a stout farmer who was watching his men in a neighbouring field.
The happy lad then played with his switch again, and loitered by the ancient castle as if it was a ruined cow-shed.
So much for the changes time brings round.
This lad might be descended from a serf of these old feudal lords of Millom who ruled over a country eighteen miles long, and, in some places, eight miles broad.
They were endowed with extraordinary privileges, for theirs was a jurisdiction into which the sheriff of the county could not enter.
They had power of life and death, and" enjoyed" jura regalia in six parishes. "
Mr. Denton, writing in 1688, says that the gallows stood on a hill near the castle, on which criminals had been executed within the memory of persons then living."
But times are strangely altered since Henry the First was king, when de Boyville, lord of Millom, gave" all the parishes between Esk and Millom to the Abbey of St. Mary, at York," and gave, also, the churches of Bootle and Witcham, and the land called" Monk Force," to the Abbey of Furness, reserving only" the harts and hinds, wild boars and their kinds, and all series of hawks therein."
The first lords of Millom are associated with the ancient legend of" the Horn of Egremont Castle," and they bore the horn and hattrell in their escutcheon.
See note B. "
Horn it was which none could sound, No one upon living ground, Save he who came as rightful heir To Egremont's domains and castle fair."
Their names are now almost forgotten in their own land.
The castle was embattled in 1335, by Sir John Huddleton.
In ancient times it was surrounded by a fine park, of which there are some scanty remains on a ridge to the north.
The greatest square tower is still habitable, though its old battlements are gone.
The castle was invested during the parliamentary war, and the old vicarage house was pulled down at the same time," lest the rebels should take refuge there."
There are traces of the ancient moat still visible.
We turned in between the broken pillars of an old gateway, and up a deserted avenue, to the front of the ruin, which, though not of great extent, presents a fine specimen of the decayed pomp of feudal times.
The walls of the court-yard were all weather-stained and worn; and, here and there, delicate beds of moss have crept over them, year after year, so long, that the moist old stones are now mantled with hues of great beauty.
The front of the castle is roofless, and some parts of its massive walls are thickly clothed with ivy, in which the wild birds were flitting out and in to their nests.
Even in ruin this part of the castle has a noble appearance.
A fine flight of worn steps leads up through the frowning archway, to the great tower, in the inner court.
Above this archway a stone shield bears the decayed heraldries of the Huddleston family; and these arms appear, also, on the slab in the garden wall, and in other parts of the buildings.
Whilst we roamed about the inner court, the front entrance of the great tower stood open, and we caught sight of a fine old carved staircase, which led me to suppose that the interior may retain many of its ancient characteristics.
That part of the moat which remains below the walls of the western tower is mostly filled with weeds and brushwood; and it divides the castle from the ancient parish church, which stands upon a knoll, overlooking the fields.
The church is a venerable building, with its quaint little turret, contain - ing two bells.
Near the easy window is an octagon stone font, ornamented with quatrefoils, and a shield charged with the arms of Huddleston. "
The church contains an ancient mural tablet to the memory of the Huddleston family, and near it is an altar-tomb ornamented with Gothic tracery, on which recline the effigies of a knight and his lady, but in a very mutilated state."
Peeping through a corner window we say this altar-tomb, with its recumbent figures, close to the wall.
In the churchyard, the sculptured shaft of an ancient cross, charged with four shields, still stands erect.
A plaintive tone of decay was over all the works of man about us, in spite of the smiling fields; and the rooks, cawing above the tree-tops which shade the ruin, were quite in keeping with the spirit of the scene.
In the burial-ground all was hoary and old.
The worn steps leading to the field; the dim sun-dial; the mossy walls; the fragments of ancient sculpture reared against the church; the head stones, leaning decrepidly in irregular ways; the weed-grown grave-stones, mottled with decayed verdure, and trodden by long footing, till almost illegible.
Fit companion, this eloquent old bed-chamber of the dead, for the mouldering fortress whose pride it had seen, and whose decline it was sharing.
There was nobody about; but a faint buzz came from the new school-house, a little northward.
We knocked at the inner door, and a stout young man with a mild face came out to us.
He was too shy to talk much, but he told us that there was a fine view from the top of a knoll, three fields off, westward.
A footpath from the church stile led to it, and, when we came there, it was as he had said.
The rippling estuary, filled with the top of the tide, and all glorious with sunshine, was in sight, spreading out to the open sea.
Close to, on the north-west, Black Coomb looked solemnly down upon us.
Going eastward, the eye wandered over the Coniston range; till, on the morning of the horizon, the sky was wild with mountains behind mountains reared, among whose summits the sun was trailing his golden hues in graceful change, as if trying to weave a garment fit for such a royal scene.
At the foot of the knoll there was a charming contrast in the silent fields, the church, and the ruined castle half - concealed by trees.
We returned by the avenue again, taking the road thence to Broughton In-Furness.
The way was full of variety; now down between the trees, and by an old farmstead; now meandering high about the unshaded upland, overlooking Duddon, and in sight of hills.
About three miles on the road we came into a shady dell - a sylvan cup - where the wheel of Thwaites's mill is turned by a mountain stream, and the trees make" a kind of checkered night and day."
There seemed to be just room for the mill, the house, the bridge, the road, the trees, and the restless little river, whose lulling murmur awakened" dreams that wave before the half - shut eye."
We asked for a drink of milk at the miller's door, and were invited into a room, where the goodwife and her daughter were lining bed quilts with wadding, upon a wooden frame.
We rested, and talked with them awhile; and when we rose to go, the old lady seemed half - offended that we should ask what there was to pay.
At Buckman's Hall, which, I suppose, takes its name from the old house close by, we gained the highest point of the road, and a sharp turn brought in sight a splendid prospect of the upper part of the estuary and the country around it.
The mountains seen from this height are nearly the same as seen from the knoll near Milom Church, but here they look grander, and present a different aspect, through change of position.
This fine view is before us most of the way down Buckman's Brow, a long steep, ending in a shady avenue of trees as we draw near Duddon Bridge.
The day had travelled by while we had lingered, and twilight was now closing over the scene.
Before we were across Duddon it began to rain.
We hurried over the green level, and up the hill, from the top of which the rain-loaded blast pelted us gallantly into the old King's Arms, at Broughton, a very comfortable shelter, especially at such a time.
Tea, with good trimmings, was set out for us in a cosy parlour, where several trunks were piled in a nook.
Here we talked of what we had seen during the day, and of the next day's ramble up Duddon Vale.
It wanted an hour and a half to the time for the last train to Ulverstone; so we agreed to run down there for the night, and return to Broughton early in the morning.
The remainder of our time was passed in the kitchen, with the landlord and a thin-faced young man, whom we had taken at first for a boozy cobbler; but he soon con - vinced us we were wrong.
His manner was shy and hesitating; but on the commonest theme his language was choice and appropriate.
He evinced an ardent love of nature and a well-stored mind.
When we inquired about Duddon Vale, his eyes lighted up as he spoke of his rambles there, and of Wordsworth's sonnets in its praise.
We spent an interesting hour with him till train time; and after ordering breakfast for eight o'clock next morning, we rolled down to Ulverstone through the rainy night.
As we parted in the market place, my friend said," Half Past six in the morning, at the station.
Good night!""
Good night!
- but stop; how if one should sleep too long?"
" Well then, the titter co' the latter up.
Good night!"
Next morning was fine again, and we were back at the King's Arms, in Broughton, half an hour before breakfast time.
Let us open the window and see what we can see.
Our parlour looks upon a kind of square opposite the hotel.
About six yards from the corner there is a little grocery shop, up two worn steps, where women and children are going in and out with loaves, and ounces of tea, and butter wrapped in copybook leaves.
Across the square a brown-faced man, in corduroy, is leaning against a doorway, smoking, and quietly stroking his chin, as if he thought it was about time to get shaved, if he only had the penny.
Blue smoke is curling up lazily in the clear air from cottage chimneys; now it flies away on a gust of wind from the sea; and now it curls up lazily again.
Doves are cooing and strutting yonder; sparrows are chirping noisily about the roofs; and hens are pecking on the road below.
But the town is getting busy, for two men saunter into the square, talking together.
One is filling a short pipe, and the other carries a long rough stick, such as cow-jobbers delight in.
The man with the short pipe strikes a match on the bowl, turns his back to the wind, gets a light, pushes in the tobacco with his finger, puffs carefully half - a-dozen times, and then calls out" Good morning" to somebody at a window over our heads.
Now a young greyhound bounds like a four - legged arrow into the sunny space, and begins to gambol about alone, as if playing with an invisible friend.
Here comes another dog, a little frisky fellow, of no particular breed.
This one barks a great deal, in a good-tempered way, and the two begin to sniff and frolic to and fro, as dogs do when they are" thick together."
What is he that comes next upon this little sunlit stage of country life?
A very short, double-jointed fellow, with an enormous head and a most antique visage, that reminds me of something I have seen at the end of a spout on an old church wall.
His age seems to have parted company with his growth about half way up the usual height, in an untimely way.
He is talking to himself, and smiling about something, reckless of all observers, as he paddles across the square with a great pitcher in his hands.
Which is the pitcher and which is the man?
for though evidently a man in age, he does n't look as if he would hold more than two gallons or so, if he was fairly cleared out to make room for it.
What if he should stumble now, and fall into the pitcher?
Hold!
he has turned the corner.
May peace lead him kindly by the hand through this uncertain world.
The clock in the little shop is striking eight, and a chubby lad trails by.
His hands are deep in his pockets, and his nose looks cold, and moist.
A slate hangs on his arm by a string, as he goes, with wandering steps and slow, sulkily kicking bits of stone on the road, and" creeping like snail unwillingly to school."
Suddenly a woman's voice calls out," Come now, gang thi ways, or I'll warm thee, my gentleman!"
The lad starts, takes his hands out of his pockets, and makes haste off at the house-end; after which, - he mutters and loiters again.
Yonder, right before us, at the head of the steep main street, a private carriage road leads up the wooded hill to the tower of the Broughtons, of Broughton.
But that must wait; for" neat-handed Phillis" is laying the cloth, and our friend of last night trickles in, with a mild salute, to join us at the morning meal.
Over breakfast we talked about the route for the day: and our friend gave us some valuable hints anent it.
The way we chose was up Duddon Vale, by Seathwaite, to Cockley Beck.
Then, over Wrynose into Little Langdale; returning by Yewdale to Coniston, and so home by rail.
After breakfast we walked up to Broughton Tower, which crowns a woody eminence, at the head of the town.
It commands a fine view over the town and estuary out to sea; and eastward, of Furness Fells.
The exterior has been somewhat modernised; and the old battlements have been replaced by a plain parapet.
This tower is associated with a remarkable adventure in our history, which led to the downfall of its ancient owners.
Mr. West says of the Broughtons, in his" Antiquities of Furness,"" This was an Anglo Saxon family of high antiquity, in whose possession the manor of Broughton had remained from time immemorial, and whose chief seat was at Broughton till the reign of Henry Vii.
At this period the power and interest of Sir Thomas Broughton was so considerable, that the Duchess of Burgundy relied on him as one of the principal confederates in the attempt to subvert the government of Henry Vii.
by pretensions of Lambert Simnel."
What the fate of that adventure was is well known. "
Sir Thomas is said to have fallen in the field of battle; but there remains a tradition that he returned, and lived many years amongst his tenants at Witherslack, in Westmorland, and was interred in the chapel there."
With this unfortunate gentleman the family was extinguished in Furness; and the manor was granted to the Earl of Derby.
For nearly two centuries it has been the property of the Sawrey family.
Broughton may be called the capital of upper Furness.
It is about six miles from the summit of Black Coomb, and that mountain may be approached by the high-road, as far as Broadgate, from whence there is a hill-side way onward.
Broughton is the nearest point by rail to the beautiful vale of Duddon, which begins about a mile north of the town.
Chapter The Third. "
In glens which resound to the waterfall's song, My spirit shall play the wild echoes among: I'll climb the dark steep to my lone mountain home.
And heartsome and poor over the solitude roam: And the keen winds that harp on the heathery lea Shall sing the grand anthem of freedom to me."
The Moorlands.
Now we set out for the solitary vale and stream which Wordsworth loved and sung.
By ten o'clock that bright forenoon we had crossed the hill north of Broughton town, and were walking over a green holm through which the pretty" Little" runs babbling and dancing, like a child dressed for a holiday, to go with Duddon to the sea.
Leaving the Bootle road near Duddon Bridge, we turned off at the end of a black-smith's shop, taking the right hand road, which leads between tall hedge-rows up into the vale.
This road soon quits the green level, and begins to soar windingly between the trees, by little plots of sloping garden, and cottages perched like bird-nests in leafy nooks, high above the narrow entrance of the vale.
The river is deep below, hidden by the woods rising from its margin.
The tree-shaded banks by our way-side were often thick with ferns and lichens, and tangled bushes of the dear old bramble," whose fruit full well the schoolboy knows."
Its prickly stalks were loaded with luscious berries, and we stopped to pick a handful now and then.
On the opposite side, the spreading shades of Duddon Grove mantled the lower slope of the mountain with rich autumnal foliage.
There, below, green lawns trim paths, and cultivated grounds marked the influence of wealth and taste; above, Stoneside Fell rose proud and poor, and sternly free.
Now we lost sight of the landscape, as we came into a cool, shady dingle, where the checkered pattern of overhanging leaves played quietly upon the sunny road; and the unseen river wooed us thenceforth with its quiet song.
The hills begin to rise wilder before us - Corney Fell.
Stainton Fell, Hest Fell, and Birker Fell.
About a mile and a half from the entrance of the vale, we emerge upon a common.
Here, the mansion of Duddon Grove, its rich grounds and plumy woods are left behind; and cultivated beauty gives place to the wild charms of untrimmed nature. "
The wilderness is rich with liberty."
Yon patch of sunshine, gliding across the dark breast of Stainton Fell, seems to slacken in its journey, as if it had met with a spot that pleased it there.
A smell of wood fires is about us; and mottle-faced lambs skip away from the ferny slope, bleating tremulously, and turning round to look back now and then.
Here the solitary vale is almost treeless; and the road freaks in and out, so near the stream, that we are continually halting in wonder and admiration as some reach, more beautiful than the last, steals into sight.
These mountain rivers obey the moods of the weather with great alacrity; hence the local proverb," Up with a shower, and down in an hour."
But Duddon was in its glory on that sunny day, after the recent rains.
Grand as those wild fells are, all purpled with autumnal splendour, the speciality, the very genius of that valley's charm, is the varied loveliness of its stream.
I have roamed by many a pleasant moorland river, but I never saw one so full of delightful change as the Duddon.
Every turn of it brings a new picture to the eye.
Now, wildly-glad, it leaps down from the rocky hills; now, almost silent, it glides by in" liquid lapse serene;" now it meanders, pranked into a thousand silvery shapes of beauty, where moss-clad stones lie strewn about its bed in nature's careless state, and where its water seems to complain;" with gentle murmur, that its course they do restrain."
For three or four miles the road lies more or less near the stream, and we trailed by through its enchanting sights and sounds.
At Ulpha Kirk," to the pilgrim's eye as welcome as a star," there is a small hamlet near the bridge; and on a knoll close by, the little church stands, of which Wordsworth says: - " How sweet were leisure!
could it yield no more Than' mid that wave-washed churchyard to recline, From pastoral graves extracting thoughts divine; Or there to pace, and mark the summits hoar Of distant moonlit mountains faintly shine, Soothed by the unseen river's gentle roar."
Whilst we lingered on the bridge, from whence the stream is more wildly charming than before, a tall gentleman, with a fishing basket slung from his shoulder, rode quietly up on a fine horse.
He stopped, and we got into talk about the beauty of the river at this place.
He pointed out some of the most striking features of the scene; and we learned in the course of conversation, that he was an enthusiastic botanist, and author of" The Natural History of Redcar."
A little beyond Ulpha Kirk we came to another bridge, which a passing dalesman called" T Aad Mill Bridge."
Here the clear green-tinged stream, flowing deep between thick woods, over mossy rocks, is worth stopping to look at.
A little farther, we pass a tiny chapel, with a marble slab over the door, on which is graven, - " To Thee, O Lord, whose goodness crowns our days, Our thankful hearts this humble temple raise: Blest Jesus, by thy spirit teach our youth, And sanctify our age with heavenly truth."
Half a mile beyond this chapel, on the northern slope of the road, the country opens before us, and, as" Black's Guide" say," The finest coup d' oeil in the whole valley presents itself."
We are now what is called" Low, in Ulpha," and the mountains begin to gather wildly above, Cove, Blakerigg, Walna Scar, Seathwaite Fell, and Dow Crag; and right a-head, the rugged mass of Wallabarrow Crag is a remarkable feature.
A tall dalesman was striding in our direction, and we fell into company with him, taking two steps for his one.
He knew the valley very well, and had roamed the fells more than thirty years.
Pointing to Wallabarrow Crag he said," That's a rough clim, now, when yan comes tull it."
We asked him how far Seathwaite was off" Oh," said he, pointing up the vale" Seathut's just theer."
" But what distance is it?"
" Wheea, mebby three mile, or so."
We found that" mebby," and" or so," are such elastic elements of measure that there is no calculating their exact value.
They have only vague notions of distance in these dales.
Sometimes, the place we were travelling to seemed to get farther off the more we went towards it, so it appeared as if the best way to reach our destination would be to turn our backs upon it, and walk the other way.
As we drew near Seathwaite we began to talk about Robert Walker, the famous old minister there.
He thought him one of the greatest men that ever lived, if he" hedn't hed to scrat sea sair for a living.
I' Wonderful Walker' time," said he," Seeathut parson gat varra lile money, an' hed to mak oot wi' a lock o' odds an' ends, sek as he could hod on.
Amang udder things, t' farmers all gev him a cleease o' woo, an' a sheet o' hay a piece yance a year.
T' hay were to be as mich as he could carry fra' t' field, in a blanket.
An' aa've heeard t' aad standards o' Seeathut say," continued he," that sometimes he packed t' blanked seea full that he could n't trail it neea way; an' he hed to tak a lock on it oot afore he could manish to gan.
** Bud what, he was a varra good giver, an' a varra good man, poor as he was."
By this time, we were low down in the vale, near Duddon side again, at a place which he called" Hall Bridge, i' Pendle Home," about a mile from Seathwaite.
Here he advised us to leave the high road, and take a bye-path up the left-hand side of the river" ower t' Hippin Steans," and through the wood to Seathwaite Chapel.
This route reveals, especially at the Hipping Stones, a beautiful part of the stream, and is very little farther than by the high road to Seathwaite.
Here we parted with our rustic friend, who was" ganning on by Wallabarraw Crag, efter some sheep."
The great beauty of the Duddon held us at the Hipping Stones a few minutes.
Wordsworth says of these Hipping Stones, that they " Seem a zone Chosen for ornament - stone matched with stone In studied symmetry, with interspace For the clear waters to pursue their race Without restraint."
After this we made our way through the wood on the other side, and over the broken wood bridge, to Seathwaite Chapel.
In the burial-ground, we sat down upon a large slab, supported by two upright stones, looking at the modest edifice, and thinking of the primitive old pastor who laboured there through most of last century; " Whose good works formed an endless retinue: Such priest as Chaucer sang in fervent lays; Such as the heaven-taught skill of Herbert drew; And tender Goldsmith crowned with deathless praise!"
See note C. The slab we sat on was graven with these words: -" In memory of the Rev.
Robert Walker, who died on the 25th of June 1802, in the 93rd year of his age, and 67th year of his curacy at Seathwaite.
Also of Ann, his wife, who died the 28th of January 1800, in the 93rd year of her age.
Also Elizabeth Robinson, their eldest daughter, who died 3rd of February 1820, aged 81 years," There was a world of eloquence in this simple record.
It was full of scenes of quiet, unsophisticated life, and serene decay.
Peace be to the venerable sleepers.
We seldom find a father, mother, and daughter, lying in one grave, whose three ages amount to two hundred and sixty - seven years.
On another gravestone was this epitaph: - " Time was I stood where thou dost now, And viewed the dead as thou dost me: Ere long thou' lt lie as low as I, And others stand to look at thee."
In Seathwaite Chapel Yard, where the Duddon runs close by, murmuring it" one smooth story for all years," a man might well feel that there are " Tongues in trees, books in the running brooks, Sermons in stones, and good in everything."
We are now about five miles from Cockley Beck, and, a little beyond the chapel, Duddon comes over the rocks in a succession of beautiful little falls.
After this the road crosses the stream from Seathwaite Tarn, at Nettleslack Bridge.
Near this bridge the two roads meet, and a guide-post points one way to Coniston, and the other to Langdale.
The Langdale road, on the left, is ours.
This upper part of the vale is wildly grand.
The Langdale road goes up through a narrow defile, between Harter Fell and Grey Friars, where the stream is heard rushing deep below, overfrowned by precipitous crags.
Emerging from this pass, it is worth while to linger a few minutes at Birk Brig.
There, the stream comes down in a narrow channel, where the rocks are worn into quaint arches, and fantastic shapes, that might be the ruins of some water-spirit's palace.
The river settles here in pools of clear green-tinged water, beautiful as liquid emerald.
Some of these pools, or" pots," are ten feet deep.
Above this bridge the stream narrows rapidly, and the valley becomes a scene of almost unrelieved desolation, with Grey Friars on the right, Harter Fell and Hardknot on the left, and rocky Wrynose shutting in the scene ahead.
Here," cloud-born" Duddon steals down the wild vale as if afraid to disturb its loneness.
Wordsworth says of the young stream, that the whistling blast chants its birth, and desolation is its patron saint.
We began to think that Cockley Beck ought to be near, and yet there was no visible habitation in the silent glen.
At last we spied a shepherd stalking along the hill with a lame sheep on his shoulders; and a clump of stunted trees came in sight, by the streamlet side.
Our path led up to the trees, and we found a rude farmstead partly sheltered by them.
It certainly did n't look promising at first.
Could this be Cockley Beck that we had heard so much oft?
We knocked, and inquired.
The good-wife came to the door, and said, with a smile," This is t' pleece.
There's neea udder hoose i' t dal.
Will ye cum in?"
We sat down in a low-roofed room, at the front.
The smoky rafters were hung with hams, and shrunken legs of cured mutton; and, on a long shelf near the ceiling there were little cheeses, dried herbs, staves, jars, and a tattered book or two.
By the ingle, a tall, grey-haired man, in clogs, corduroy breeches, and a rough light-blue woollen jacket, of home-made cloth, was quietly watching the wood fire, and keeping it up by laying sticks on from a pile before him.
He was eighty - three years of age, and very deaf.
Stealing a look at us occasionally, he turned away again, and went on feeding the fire, with a countenance as calm as if he was a statue of contented age.
Evening was drawing on, and they told us we could stay all night, so we doffed our satchels, and began to be at home.
The good-wife bustled about in her blue bedgown; and a low babble of children came from a room behind, which was half - filled with eilding for the winter.
Looking out at the window, on the other side of the narrow vale, Hardknot rose bleak and craggy to the skies.
Between its summit and that of Harter Fell, a lofty pass leads into Eskdale.
About half - way down the Eskdale side are the ruins of a Roman camp, called Hardknot Castle," whose guardians bent the knee to Jove and Mars."
In the opening between Hardknot and Wrynose, Scawfell was pointed out," with a lile mist a-top on it."
There was about an hour and a half of daylight left; and, as it was" nobbut a mile an' a hauf, mebby," to Hardknot Castle, we agreed to go there whilst tea was preparing.
It was strange to see a little girl of thirteen put on her best clothes to go with us as guide.
The sun had set before we reached the head of the pass, and the wind blew keen across.
The ruins lie about half - way down the opposite side, - a great square of fallen stones, on a commanding platform, looking over Eskdale out to the sea, - a very beautiful prospect.
Around the ruins mighty mountains frowned, Skawfell, Hardknot, and Harter Fell, all savage desolation.
That wild scene must have changed very little since Roman trumpets woke its echoes.
Scawfell saw those warriors come and go, like the mists on his summit; and he still looks proudly upon their scattered camp, untameable by ought but Him who reared his head so high.
We had only a few minutes to wander in this ruined eyrie of the Roman eagle.
The shades of evening were making green Eskdale dim, and we hastened up the pass again.
By the time we reached John Tyson's house, candles were burning inside; clouds were gathering gloomily, and it began to rain.
A white cloth was on the table, and a bright wood fire filled the room with ruddy light.
The goodwife spread our board with ham and eggs, and steaks of cured mutton; brown bread, white bread, and spice cakes; cheese, preserves strong tea, and cream - such as cities seldom get to see.
John Tyson had come in from the fells, and he sat on a long wood bench under the window, very quiet.
A great sheep-dog lay asleep on the hearth.
It had a stony look about the eyes, and I thought it old, and perhaps blind.
Cockley Beck was rushing by the front of the house, and the wind and rain filled the lone glen with a wild roaring.
Sitting comfortably by the solitary farmer's fire, there was a strange charm in listening to the elementary war that raged in darkness around us.
By way of getting into talk, I asked Tyson how old the dog was.
He said it was only three years old.
Dogs did n't last so long among those fells.
They had a hard life of it.
We noticed the wood fire; and he told us that brush-wood and turf was all they had to burn.
Coals were too far off, and would cost too much for carriage. "
What," said he," weere verra neer oot o' t' warld, ye see; for Cocklo' Beck's seb'm mile fra a mill, five mile fra a shop, an' aboon fower mile fra a church - an' hard roads tull it, as ye'll hev sin."
He said they made their own candles of the pith or rushes dipped in mutton fat.
They made as many in two days as lasted the whole year.
These rush dips are not much thicker than a strong knitting needle, and give but a dreary light to people accustomed to gas.
But they seemed to think the light very good; beside, they went to bed soon o' nights.
An iron clip, something like a pair of curling tongs, hung from the ceiling by a string; and in this clip the rushlight was stuck aslant, and shifted as it burnt away.
Leather for the family's shoes was bought whilst at market, in Broughton of Whitehaven; and the shoes were made in their own house, by a wondering son of Crispin, who went from farm to farm among the fells, getting his meat and lodging, and, as I understood, about two shillings a pair, for his work.
It was the same with clothing.
A tailor came up the glen at certain times, and folding his legs upon the long table under the window for a few days, he ate and drank with the rest, and chatted and stitched away, till they were clothed for the year.
Being among such a way of life as this felt like living three hundred years ago; and, somehow, the place reminded me of the highland bothy at Aberfoyle, where Bailie Nicol Jarvie signed the chieftain's tartan with a red hot poker.
Tyson's wife told us that tourists rarely went by the house without calling. "
An' sometimes," she said," thooar tramps ca's, i' threes an' fowers; an' sometimes mair nor that.
Here was yan cam reight in bi' hissel' yaa day, an' steed upo' t' harstan, an' aa gev him tuppence; an' then he wad hev some bread an' cheese.
See, aa tell' t him he mud gang to t' dear.
An' seea, when ge gat ootside, aa whipt der tull, an' barred it.
Bud, my rod, hoo he did cample.
Aa rayley thought for a while he was like to brak in agen.
*** Well, annuder time, here was six cam tegidder, when oor men was away amang t' fells, efter sheep.
Aa gat a wap on' em cumming doon, t' beckside: sea aa fasten't t' hoose up, an' crape oot o' seet wi' t' childer.
But, my word, did n't aa temm; e sair i' t' neuk; for they was a gay long time afear they wad gang away; an' they tried to get in everywheers, but the could n't manish.
Aa was terrible fain when oor men gat hem that day.
T' hel o' that lot was tean up, efter, at Ammleside, for summat or annuder."
It was clear that these mendicant robbers did not always beg there because they were hungry, for she said that" Girt dozzles o' bread an' cheese at hed bin gan tull' em was fand sometimes hudden amang t' steans bi t' road side."
When tea was over we drew round the fire, and I pulled out an old Examiner and Times to light a pipe with. "
Neah, neah," said Tyson," what - ivver are ye baan to du, bairn?
Dinnet rive that, hooivver!
What, aa'll find ye a leet.
What is' t?
A newspaper, belike!
We mud gang a lang ways to get yan o' thame at Cocklo' Beck.
What, here's plenty o' leets widdout brunning t' news, sarteny.
Ye'll mebby read us a lile bit."
I read part of the news from Italy. "
Aye, aye," said he;" What, here's gay rough deed amang' em, then!
Well, well.
Disto hear, lass!
What, theyere bagging kings and girt folk, an' killing yan annuder leek mad i' - wheer is' t, dud ye say?"
" Italy,"" Italy!
That's ower t' water somewheers.
Well, well.
Its terrible wark, bairn; terrible wark!
An' what is' t all aboot?"
read on a little, and explained the thing as well as I could; after which he folded the paper up, and put it carefully out of harm's way.
We talked on a little while, but he could n't understand this" terrible wark."
Everybody seemed tired, and we crept to bed early.
At the foot of the stairs there was a rude gate," to kep' t dogs fra gannin up."
Our little bedroom looked against the steep of" Grey Friars;" but all was wild and dark outside, and we fell asleep hearkening the stormy wind.
Next morning the weather was fine.
We crossed Wrynose Pass into Little Langdale; thence, over by Yewdale, to Coniston, and so home by rail.
Chapter The Fourth. "
Here storm, and solitude, and silence dwell; And stern sublimity hath set its throne."
J. C. Prince.
One bright morning, early in October, I fettled myself for a trip to Ennerdale Lake, which is one of the loneliest of all Cumberland's waters.
Autumn is a prime season for such a journey.
There s a pensive beauty about the declining year, which touches the gladdest spirit sometimes, with a tone of melancholy more profoundly pleasing than ought that jocund summer can inspire.
My friend had proposed that we should go by rail as far as the old town of St.
Bees, then walk on about nine miles to the lake.
The route filled me with novel expectation.
Our train did n't leave Ulverstone till half - past twelve; so I spent the forenoon in wandering among little shops in the market-place, and in gossiping with a certain eccentric chin-polisher, who once, at least, mischievously slipped the lather between my lips when I was going to talk.
I lounged a while, too, about the Advertiser office, to the annoyance of the editor, Mr. John Stanyan Bigg, author of that fine poem," Night and the Soul."
No doubt he heartily wished me at the other end of my journey, for the weekly publication fever was rising to a crisis; inky printers' devils were fluttering about; and the editorial air was getting thick with little anxieties.
But it is half - past twelve.
The train starts. "
We move in the elephantine row; The faces of our friends retire; The roof withdraws; and quaintly flow The curtsying lines of magic wire.
**** " By flower-knots, shrubs, and slopes of grass, Cut walls of rock and ivy-stains, Through winking arches now we pass, And flying meet the flying trains: Whirr - gone!
We hurry on. "
Trim corn-fields; kine in pleasant leas; A hamlet, lane, a tower, a pond; Long hedge-rows; counter changing tress, The blue and steady hills beyond.
House, platform, post, Flash, - and are lost.
"About half an hour brings us to the Duddon once more, where the scene is always changing.
It was high water, and those bleak tracks of scant herbage on which I had seen cattle browsing, with more industry than profit, yesterday; those pools and channels where poultry dabbled; that smooth embossed shore, where placid wavelets were lipping so delicately to and fro upon the yellow sands, like a mother caressing a sleeping child, - all was now a sea of white-crested billows.
The wind blows a gale from the south-west; and, far out yonder, the excited main lashes the north-west point, then breaks into mighty showers of spray, that leap high into the air, and make the sunlight wink with wild pearls.
The whole scene is alive with breezy delight.
The trees, the long osiers near the line, every bush, and shrub, and blade of grass, is stirring to the blithe influence of the wind.
Kine and lambs scamper away as we thunder by.
Here and there, a horse, too, snorts and gallops up, ignorantly-indignant, like a work-man striking at the wrong time, and little dreaming what service may be rendered to his kind by the machine which has frightened him so unreasonably.
But in yonder field, there are four of a wiser sort standing abreast behind a hedge, with a cold-and-hungry look, like men out of work.
They have endured so much that they are not to be moved by any small terror now, - the railway train may thunder on, and do its worst.
They stand with their backs to the cold wind, and they are all looking steadfastly at the ground, in one direction, as if they had just given in four charity tickets, and were confidently expecting a feed of corn and a horse-cloth a piece coming up at that spot in a few minutes.
There is something comically pathetic about the countenances of those four, - for though they are four horses, their countenances are one; and if it were not that their manes and tails toss so in the breeze, they are as motionless as so many statues of patient distress.
If there be any truth, now, in the transmigration of souls, it s not impossible that their ancestors may have stood so by causeway sides in market towns, holding down their heads, and demurely watching the effect of a doleful sentence written with chalk upon a spade.
Or, perhaps, in early life, they have been trained to stand that way in circuses, for acrobats to leap over them.
But there is no judging about such things; let the poor brutes go; I wish them a good feed a-piece.
Let us look again.
Here clouds of fieldfares are soaring and sinking in the air; there crows and seagulls mingle noisily in social crowds; yonder, compact flocks of tern fly across the water with twinkling wings.
These little roamers of the wild sea-shore make way with wonderful ease through the strong gale; and seem to quiver with delight to see Neptune's white horses leaping below.
It was very exhilarating, that ride by the sea, with the salt breeze sweeping freshly through the carriage!
A keen, quick-eyed Irish gentleman sat with us; and, looking out at the window with kindling glance, as if he gloried in this beautiful stir of nature, he rubbed his hands, and said," I'm thinking the' Gondola' will get a cheap lesson in dancing on Coniston Lake this day."
Leaving Duddon estuary, we also lose sight of the sea for several miles; but there is only a narrow belt of undulant land between, and though out of sight, I may venture to say that we are hardly out of the sound of it.
Near the quaint port of Ravenglass we are close to the sea again.
This little old marine nook is about a mile from the ancient hall of Muncaster, and stands at the confluence of the rivers Esk, Irt, and Mite, which form a sandy harbour there.
The first time I saw the place at sunset it reminded me of Kingsley's beautiful lyric," The Three Fishers."
It looks as if it belonged quite as much to the sea as to the land; and in high tides, with a strong south-west wind, the waves wash up to its little streets, as if asserting that they have as much right to be there as anybody else.
Ravenglass is nearly opposite the Isle of Man, and looks vastly like a place that has seen smuggling in its day.
A market was granted to this ancient town in the reign of King John," by right of the haven there."
For some centuries after, on the morning before St. James's Day, the officer of the Lords of Egremont proclaimed the fair in Ravenglass, attended by the sergeant of the bow of Egremont, with the insignia belonging thereto: when all the tenants of the Forest of Copeland came, as a customary service, to attend him in the proclamation of the fair, and to" abide with him during the continuance thereof."
About four miles beyond Ravenglass, the train stops at Seascale, a serene spot, with an inviting beach for sea-bathing; as they seem to have found out at the hotel close by, for there is a van upon the sands yonder.
Some quiet people, who crept down here out of the way of fashionable perturbation, are so in love with the place, that they are afraid of it being found by the rest of the world.
From Seascale onward, for more than ten miles, we run so near the sea that it looks as if we were sailing on one side and going by rail on the other; and to me, this amphibious part of the journey was very delightful.
Now we are at the town of St.
Bees, and ecclesiastical students are fluttering about the platform, in their caps and gowns.
A little way off to the left, the ancient abbey church nestles at the foot of a green hill, with the new collegiate buildings close by.
The same hill runs out westward to where the great headland of St.
Bees looks proudly over the sea.
St.
Bees is said to take its name from Sancta Bega, or Beza, an Irish saint, who founded a nunnery on the site of the present church about the year 650.
In Mr. John Linton's admirable" Hand Book of the West Cumberland Railways," I find an interesting legend of St.
Bees' foundation," extracted from an old manuscript in the Dean and Chapter Library at Carlisle;" beginning," There was a pious, religious lady abbess, and some of her sisters with her, driven in by stormy weather at Whitehaven, and the ship cast away i' the harbour, and so destitute, and so she went to the lady of Egremont Castle for relief.
That lady, a godly woman, pitied her distress, and desired her lord to give her some place to dwell in; which he did, at the now St.
Bees.
And she and her sisters sewed and spinned, and wrought carpets and other work, and lived very godly lives, and gott them much love.
She desired Lady Egremont to desire her lord to build them a house, and they would lead a religious life together; and many wolde joine with them if they had but a house and land to live upon.
Wherewith the Lady Egremont was very well pleased and spoke to her lord; he had land enough, and sholde give them some to lye up treasure in heaven.
And the lord laughed at the ladye and said he would give them as much land as snow fell upon the next morning and mid-summer day.
And the morrow looked out at the castle window, on the sea side, two miles from Egremont, all was white with snow for three miles together.
And thereupon builded this St.
Bees' Abbie, and gave all those lands was snowen unto it, and the Town and Haven of Whitehaven; and sometimes after, all the tithes thereabout, and up the mountains, and Inerdale Forest, eastward, was appropriated to this abbey of St.
Bees; which was got by one Mr. Dacres, of kindred to the Lord Dacres; gott a long lease of it at Fall of Abbies, and married one Mrs. Latos, of the Beck Hall, Millom, who afterwards married Squire Wybridge of Clifton, in Westmorland, who purchased the inheritance of the Abbie of the Crowne, and sold it to old Sir John Lowther, who gave it to his younger son, Sir Jon Lowther, Knt.
Bart., soon after."
So runs the legend.
St.
Bees had its fair share of trouble in the old times.
It was utterly destroyed by the Danes; and was always in danger in that wild borderland.
It was pillaged by the Scots, under Robert Bruce, when, according to Walter Scott, the prior was" compelled to say mass with an old hollow oak tree for his stall."
The following lines are from Wordsworth's poem on St.
Bees: - " When Beza sought of yore the Cumbrian coast, Tempestuous winds her holy passage crossed; She knelt in prayer - the waves their wrath appease; And from her vow, well weighed in Heaven's decrees, Rose where she touched the strand, the chantry of St.
Bees.
**** When her sweet voice, that instrument of love, Was glorified, and took its place, above The silent stars, among the angelic quire, Her chantry blazed with sacrilegious fire, And perished utterly; but her good deeds Had sown the spot that witnessed them with seeds, Which lay in earth expectant, till a breeze, With quickening impulse, answered their mute pleas, And lo!
a statelier pile, the Abbey of St.
Bees."
This ancient priory church - " On whose symbolic beauty gazed Peasant and mail-clad chief with pious awe," is a very interesting building, of red sandstone.
The oldest part of the walls is thickly mantled with ivy.
Nothing now remains of the once extensive conventual buildings, except faint traces west of the church.
The western entrance is by a fine deep-moulded Norman doorway; and in the interior are preserved many fine fragments of ancient sculpture originally belonging to the abbey.
There is a large hotel near the station; but, desiring to see something of the little town, we went up its one long street, and dined at a comfortable hostel, called the" Queen's Arms."
Ennerdale Lake is more than a mile nearer from Whitehaven than from St.
Bees; and there is a branch line from Whitehaven to Frizzington, within two miles and a half of the lake.
From St.
Bees it is more than nine miles.
The day was short; so we did n't linger, but took out at the north side of the town about four in the afternoon.
For about a mile the road wound slantingly up the hill, and we had a fine view of the fertile valley of St.
Bees, the church, part of the town, the sea, and the tall headland.
About three miles off, north-west, the smoke of Whitehaven made a still gray cloud in the air.
When we had got well over the hill-top, the outskirts of Egremont town were just visible, about a mile east of the road.
Egremont, or the Mount of Sorrow, is an ancient town, on the west bank of the River Ehen.
The ruins of its once famous castle stand upon a mound, a little south-east of the town.
This castle was built by William de Meschines, in the reign of William the Conqueror, who granted to him the great barony of Copeland," extending between the rivers Duddon and Derwent from north to south, and from east to west, between the mountains and the sea."
To Ranulph, brother of this baron, the conqueror granted all Cumberland.
The ancient tradition of" The Horn of Egremont" is connected with the Lucys, lords of the barony in the time of the crusades.
Our way led through a fertile country of gentle hills and dales.
It is, also, the richest part of the iron ore district, and those red hues which are so familiar to the eye in Furness, are visible here.
Roads, houses, carts, horses, and men, -" subdued to what they work in, like the dyer's hand."
There are signs of industry and wealth all round.
Mines, ironworks, flax-mills, and well-cultivated lands.
As we passed through the village of Cleator a heavy shower fell, and we took shelter in an old Irishwoman's cottage.
At the hamlet of Wath we lose sight of the open country, and descend a shady steep which brings us to a sheltered nook by the River Ehen, where there is a large old farm-house, which nature has taken a fancy to adorn.
Here the vale of Kinniside opens.
Daylight was just beginning to think of its decline when we came into this scene.
Low down by the Ehen side, our road twines on between hedges crowned with hazel; and now and then the beautiful little river glints through a gap, as we pass by.
The stream runs close to the left hand, with just a hedge between it and the road; and its melody rises so sweetly in the air, that the wind seems to stand with its finger on its lip, saying to all the landscape," Hush; that I may hear it sing!"
I ran up the hedge now and then, to take another look at the water.
This little vale of Kinniside is rich, and soft, and still.
Wood and water, hill and dale, are scattered here in exquisite relationship; and there is a retiredness and repose about it, which gives the scene a finishing charm.
Now doubt I saw it favourably by that October twilight; and I should not like to forget how beautiful it looked.
The little river itself plays lingeringly about its channel there, in pretty childlike ecstasies, as if it thought that valley an uncommonly pleasant spot, and did n't care to run away from it so soon.
The stones in its bed, too, are loth to part with the water; they stop it a little wherever they can, holding it in tinkling chat, persuading it to dance, and making it look as lovely as they can before it goes away.
We came out upon higher grounds just as the sun began to dip behind the hill.
The landscape was" calm as a resting wheel;" the air was strangely clear; and a kind of expectant silence dwelt upon all things.
The valley lay partly in twilight shade; but upon the hill - side, upon the sloping road before us, and upon the hedge-rows, and bemossed walls thereby, and setting sun's last radiance lay melting away in almost unearthly splendour.
When the sun had gone down, clouds, - which seemed to have awaited his departure, - came trooping out of the west; the wind rose wild and strong, and fitful showers came down.
By the time we reached the hamlet of Ennerdale Bridge, a dark stormy night was around us.
We were yet two miles from the lake.
I should like to have seen this mountain hamlet by daylight; but it was not so.
Its churchyard is the scene of Wordsworth's poem," The Brothers."
The place may have changed a little since" the homely priest of Ennerdale" said: " In our churchyard Is neither epitaph nor monument, Tombstone nor name - only the turf we tread And a few natural graves.
** The dead man's home Is but a fellow to that pasture field.
**** We have no need of names and epitaphs: We talk about the dead at our fire-sides.
** On a winter evening, If you were seated at my chimney's nook, By turning over these hillocks one by one, We two could travel, sir, through a strange round; Yet all in the broad highway of the world.
Now there's a grave - your foot is half upon it, - It looks just like the rest; and yet that man Died broken-hearted."
The new chapel stands on the site of a very old and simple structure.
There are two bells in the present turret; one of these is the ancient bell of Ennerdale Chapel, and bears upon its rim this inscription:" Sancta Bega, ora pro nobis."
This chapel has always belonged to St.
Bees; in fact, all Ennerdale Forest was part of the ancient endowment of that abbey.
As we stood in the middle of the village that night, there was not a light to be seen anywhere.
All was gloomy; and between the howlings of the wind the swollen river's roar arose.
By groping as much as by sight, we found our way to the kitchen of a little public-house, where we warmed and refreshed ourselves a few minutes, then set out again to finish the last two miles that lay between us and the Boathouse Inn, at Ennerdale Lake.
But, before we go on, I will give from Wordsworth's poem," The Brothers," a descriptive passage relating to Ennerdale and life there.
The old priest of Ennerdale has been telling how a certain huge crag, overlooking the vale, was once rent with lightning; and he goes on, saying, - " For accidents and changes such as these We want not store of them; a water-spout Will bring down half a mountain; what a feast For folks that wander up and down like you, To see an acre's breadth of that wide cliff One roaring cataract!
A sharp May Storm Will come with loads of January snow, And in one night send twenty score of sheep To feed the ravens; or a shepherd dies By some untoward death among the rocks; The ice breaks up and sweeps away a bridge; A wood if felled: - and then for our homes!
A child is born or christened.
a field ploughed, A daughter sent to service, a web spun, The old house-clock is decked with a new face; And hence, so far from wanting facts or dates To chronicle the time, we all have here A pair of diaries, - one serving, sir, For the whole dale, and one for each fire-side - Yours was a stranger's judgment: for historians Commend me to these valleys!"
It was a wild, dark walk, though we caught a wink of blue between the flying clouds sometimes.
At length we came to a tract of level moorland, where the storm had room to rage in.
Before we were over this, the path came to where four roads meet, and we wandered from one to the other, doubful which to take.
We climbed up to look at the broken guide-post, but that battered old friend of the stranger was dumb, and his trembling limbs pointed to nowhere.
At last we chose the road that seemed most travelled, and it turned out right.
The rising moon sent a tinge of wild light through the clouds, and we could dimly see the steeps of half - concealed mountains.
In the black profound between, we heard the lake lashing its rocky shore; but nothing of it was visible.
The scene was gloomily grand.
I would not exchange the robe of stormy darkness which Ennerdale wore that night for all that sunlight can do to make it gay.
The wild changes of weird light which stole from the moon through those flying clouds made the view more savage still.
We laboured along the splashy road, through everything that makes a man damp, but the wild sublimity of the scene repaid for all.
Our road led through a miry farm - yard, from which we emerged by great folding-doors upon a slope, down which the path continues to the water-side.
The clouds broke a little again, and we caught sight of the gables of the Boathouse Inn below.
It sounded strange, in such a scene, to hear the jolting of a cart, and people singing as blithely as if they were taking the last road home from a harvest field.
They had evidently been" calling" somewhere in the wilderness.
They passed us with a boisterous" Good night," and went singing into the gloom behind.
A clatter of hoofs next came up, and we had to stand aside, as a tall figure, on a great horse, dashed through the mist, like a moss-trooper riding home from a midnight foray.
A few minutes more found us inside the Boathouse; and the wind whistled through the lock hole after us, as if it wanted to come in and dry the mist off its wings.
The house was cheerful as the scene was wild, - a comfortable kernel in a stormy shell.
The kitchen was a large clean room looking into another, in which a matronly woman and her grown-up daughter were busy among butter and milk-bowls.
The landlord and two young shepherds were basking by the fire, with their dogs about them.
Everything in the place evinced plenty, and cleanly, homely care.
We were at home with these hearty mountaineers in a minute, and the women began to prepare a kind of dinner with tea to it.
In the meantime we went outside to look at the lake.
The clouds are breaking into detached masses - all flying earnestly in one direction - like knots of Chartists hurrying to a great meeting.
Between these flying masses the clam blue sky begins to shew itself; and the moon is up.
Now hidden behind a dusky cloud, her brilliance overflows its border with a silvery fringe; now, as she sails into sight, the rocky mountains soften in her smile; now, full and fair, upon the open blue, she floods the landscape with queenly radiance, and all the world grows tenderly beautiful beneath her pensive spell.
But look at the lonely lake: it is alive with enchantments!
In this sheltered corner little eddies of shimmering silver flit about, - the dainty Ariels of moonlit water; there, is a burnished islet of stirless brilliance, in which even the moon smiles to see herself look so passing fair; and, out beyond, the wide waters are in a tremulous fever of delight with her sweet influence.
But now a great fit of cloud comes on, and all is gloom again.
If there be magic in the world, it is this!
When it cleared again, we took a boat.
The landlord cautioned us not to pull far out, or we should find it difficult to get back again that night.
We pulled to and fro about the broadest end of the lake, between the mountain called" Herdhouse," on the north, and the rock called" Angling Crag," which is overtopped by Revelin on the south.
Near Angling Crag a little islet of stones rise from the lake.
As oft as we approached these stones, we found that the stormy wind had such a forcible sweep the whole length of the narrow lake, that it was best to return.
It was a wild scene from the water that night.
One minute Crag Fell, Revelin, and Herdhouse were lit up to their summits by the moon; the next they were all gloom, and half - concealed by drifting mists.
We pulled till we were tired, then tethered the boat, and went to tea.
It was a spread that would have done credit to any inn in Christendie.
The window of the room where it was set out looked upon the lake.
After tea, we went to roost with a will.
Our bedroom was scrupulously clean, and even more tastefully furnished than is common at good inns in large towns.
But," Good night!"
God bless the man that invented beds!
Chapter The Fifth. "
Scenes Where savage grandeur wakes an awful thrill."
Wordsworth Our clothes had been dried and put into comfortable trim overnight; and when we rose from sleep a crisp October morning was steeping the mountain tops in splendour.
The wind was still, and Ennerdale Water lay in its craggy frame, like a looking-glass under the sky.
That sublime gloom which, last night, by half concealing the features of the scene, had suggested something grander than what it concealed - was all gone; and the mountains rose clear from the water up to where their rolling summits made bold outlines against the sky.
It was a glorious morning; but there was more of the lonely and sterile about this lake than I have seen about any other.
Ennerdale Lake is about three miles long, and three quarters of a mile at its broadest part.
The only signs of cultivation about it are on its western shore; the rest of the scene is all barren crags.
About midway upon this western shore, the Boathouse Inn stands, and commands a good view of the broadest part of the water, and of the encircling mountains.
About a mile from the inn, the lake narrows, and winds out of sight between Herdhouse and Revelin; and the water beyond this point lies in a scene of solitary sublimity.
At the head of the wide narrow vale beyond the lake, Great Gable rises, 2925 feet, closing the landscape magnificently; and on the south side the vale is bounded by the mountain called Pillar, 2893 feet high.
Strangers are strongly advised to climb the summit of Red Pike, on the north side of the lake, from where there is a fine prospect, commanding views of the five lakes, Ennerdale, Buttermere, Crummock Water, Lowes Water and Derwent Water.
Ennerdale lake supplies the town of Whitehaven, and its waters are said to be the purest in the north of England.
The mountains seen from the Boathouse inn are Herdhouse and Bowness Knot, on the north side; and Revelin and Iron Crag on the south.
Steeple and Pillar are in sight also east of these.
Pillar takes its name from a lofty, precipitous rock," rising like a column from the vale" at the head of the lake.
The rock is a remarkable feature of the grand mountain to which it gives a name. "
It was considered inaccessible until the year 1826, when and adventurous shepherd clambered to the summit.
Since then it has been several time ascended.
The prospect from the top of the mountain is extremely noble."
In Wordsworth's poem," The Brothers," the old priest of Ennerdale tells of a young dalesman who wandered one May morning up this mountain with his companions.
He had lingered behind the rest, and was missed by them, until, returning, they spied him stretched at ease upon the aery summit of this fearful crag.
Not thinking any ill they went home without him; but next morning the wanderer was still unheard of.
The neighbours were alarmed, and the missing youth was sought for, high and low.
Before noon, " They found him at the foot of that same rock - Dead, and with mangled limbs."
It was supposed tha, in falling, he had grasped his shepherd's staff, " For on that Pillar of rock It had been caught mid-way; and there for years It hung; - and mouldered there."
Pillar stands between Ennerdale Head and Wastdale Head.
I heard something more about the mountain when we got to Wastdale, and more also about the disasters peculiar to mountain life.
I was wandering about the house that morning, whilst breakfast things were being laid out.
The landlady was a kind and cheerful old dame, with a spice of humour in her.
I wanted shaving badly, - or rather, I was very much in need of shaving, so I asked her which was the way to the nearest barber's shop. "
Ye mun tak' t' Whtehaven road for that," said she," an' then your beard ull hev time to groo a bit langer afore it gets cut.
But ye need n't be particklar aboot yer chin.
Yeere fair mair likely to need a shoemaker, or an aad wife to mend yer stockin's, afore ye git to Wasd' le Head - that is, iv ye do get theer - for a've sin folk start fra this house to gan t' sem way that ye ere ganning, an' when they've gitten ower top o' Scarf Gap, they've ten a wrang turn an' fand thersens here agen at dark o' t' neet, varra much to their surprise.
So yeed better mind.
Aa's nobbut telling ye, ye knaw.
But iv ye do happen to come, we's be like to mak yo as comfortable as we can, aa reckon."
And I have no doubt they would have made us comfortable, for they know how to do it.
About ten in the forenoon we set out for Buttermere.
Our way was a shepherd's track, over the north-western mountain pass, by the edge of Floutern Tarn, and so down, on the right hand, Between Melbreak and Blea Crag, to Buttermere, a walk of six miles.
We had not gone half a mile before we missed the way, and got to the little hamlet of Bowness, at the north-western corner of the lake.
Here we inquired again, at a shepherd's cottage, where two dogs rushed out upon us.
An old wife came forth, and, pointing up in the same direction we had been shewn before, she said," Mak t' best gate ye can up by t' lift hond side o' this beck, till ye cum tull a sheep-track ower between t' fell-tops.
Then gang on by t' track, an' hug t' beck till ye cum to Floutern Tarn.
When ye cum to that, lig weel tull it, or ye'll git wrang.
Then gang forret down by t' seam track, an' clip tereight hond mountain gaily, till ye cum to Scale Force,, an' then ye'll see Buttermer reight afore ye."
Thanking the old woman, we struck up the rocky moorland steep.
After a hard and slippery climb, we came upon the track, but it was often so dim that we had some difficulty in keeping it.
This bleak pass was all trembling swamp, soaked with the recent rains; and though we kept the track pretty well, such as it was, there was more wading than dry walking in it.
A last, after about three miles' tramp, Floutern Tarn came in sight, on our right hand, nestling in the gloomy shade of Herdhouse.
To anyone going this way, Floutern Tarn is one of the principal guiding-marks, and he must take heed of it.
There is nothing very remarkable in this cheerless sheet of water, except its extreme loneliness.
This little hermit of the mountains looks up to heaven from its rocky bed with ascetic eye, as if it would rather be absorbed there than mingle with the vain pleasures of this world's busy waters.
At Floutern Tarn we come to the eastern edge of the pass; and down in the eastern vale, three miles off, we get a glimpse of the green land which divides Buttermere from Crummock Water.
The mountains too, seen from this point, are very grand.
We now began to descend the steep, keeping as well as possible to the track, which wanders bewilderingly along the base of the right hand mountains, Herdhouse and Blea Crag.
Our descent was a mixture of sliding, jumping, wading, running, and scratching, - with an enlivening tumble, dropt in no and then, to give the whole a finishing flavour, and make it go down better.
We lost the main path so oft, that, at last, we gave it up altogether, and went ahead the best way we could, taking advantage of any little sheep-walk that led our way.
It was a rough bit of travelling, but we got through it merrily.
Above two miles down from Floutern tarn, the southern corner of Crummock Water becomes visible; and Scale Force is on the right hand, a long silver line, shining between the lofty crags, and partly shrouded by scanty foliage.
Not feeling inclined to go up to the fall, we went forward to the foot of Red Pike, and so across to Buttermere.
The little hamlet of Buttermere is scattered about a gentle slope, at the base of Whiteside, and near the foot of the lake.
The road to Keswick leads up from it, over Buttermere Haws, 800 feet high, and then through the vale of Newlands.
The hamlet stands on the east side of a stripe of cultivated land, which divides the twin lakes of Buttermere and Crummock, and on which three or four farmhouses are straggled about the fields.
This little isthmus of green land, with its tufts of trees, and the hamlet at its side, contrasts pleasantly with the steep and lofty mountains which gather around these waters.
The mountains here are among the highest and wildest in Cumberland; Mellbreak, Whiteside, Grassmoor, Ladhouse, Whiteless Pike, Robinson, Yew Crag, Honister, the Hay Stacks, High Crag, High Stile, and Red Pike, - these are the guardians of the vale in which Buttermere and Crummock Water lie.
Crummock water is three miles long by three quarters of a mile broad; and Buttermere is one mile and a quarter long by half a mile broad.
There is a splendid view of these two lakes, and of the encircling mountains, from a place called" The Knots," about three hundred yards from the Victoria Inn, in Buttermere.
The mountains, however, cannot be so well seen anywhere as from the bosom of Crummock Water.
Seen from that lake, Melbreak is remarkably fine, and" Whiteside and Grassmoor are majestic in the highest degree."
There are two inns now at Buttermere - the Victoria and the Fish.
The last was the house kept by the famous" Beauty of Buttermere," whose unhappy story has been so often told in guide-books and elsewhere.
There was no bustle about the hamlet when we were there, - nobody wandering about, - not a wheel to be seen in the space at the front of the Fish.
The fever of the tourist season had cooled down; the place was taking rest; and we seemed to have it to ourselves.
We went into the Fish, because it has a quaint look and a story connected with it; and there we dined on" char," that dainty fish which is said to have been first brought to these lakes by the old Romans.
About three we set off for Gatesgarth, at the head of Buttermere, about two miles off.
The road goes along high ground, on the eastern bank of the lake, and the water shews itself through the trees most of the way.
On the left, the lower acclivities of the mountain called Robinson are cultivated, in some places clothed with fir woods.
In the length of this walk there are two fine mansions, occupying choice positions, on the slope between the road and the lake, and each in a paradise of groves and gardens, fringing the solemn little lake with a beauty that it would do a man's heart good to see.
The day was cool, and calm, and bright, and this walk was a delightful change.
Note D. Note E. Gatesgarth is a large farmstead, a little beyond the lake, and at the foot of Honister Crag.
Seen from this spot, that mighty amphitheatre of precipitous rock is a sublime sight.
A Gatesgarth guides may be had.
The day was getting far spent, and I had the old Ennerdale landlady's advice in mind about losing our way.
But there was not a guide at home.
The last had gone with a man to Wastdale some time before; and the girl said we should very likely meet him returning.
The toughest part of the journey was still before us, and there was nothing for it but to set to work.
As we toiled up Scarf Gap, Honister Crag grew ever more awfully impressive.
Its frowning solitude was more widely and distinctly under the eye, marked with wandering streaks of white, where the waters came down from wildernesses too savage for anything but storm and cloud to abide.
We panted up.
The last nook of Buttermere Lake glided out of sight, and the valley disappeared.
Higher yet, we climbed and twined among scattered rocks, whilst on each hand steep crags glared sternly down through the mist.
On the crown of the pass, we came to a little platform of swampy land, where the track grew faint, and began to branch off this way and that, always ending in impassable bog, or in some untrodden part of the solitude.
The wind blew wild and chill, and great clouds of thick mist folded us so completely in their damp embrace, that we were getting wet through, and sometimes could hardly see a yard before us.
At last we caught sight of the path disappearing upon the edge of the mountain; and we rattled down into the glen through which the River Liza runs from Great Gable to Ennerdale Water.
A tall young shepherd was coming up the mountain, with a plaid on his shoulder and a long staff in his hand.
This was the guide of whom they spoke at Gatesgarth.
I was inclined to take him to Ennerdale with us, but my friend put a good face on the matter, and thought we should manage very well.
The guide pointed to a solitary little tree up the glen, and near the foot of Black Sail, telling us that we should find the path to Wastdale on this side of it.
It seemed easy enough to get there, so we set off again with a will, not thinking of the mosses, waters, slaps, and boggy bewilderments that lay between us and our aim.
Down we went, over rocks, shingles, and" slape places;" and through spongy deceitful spots, where lurking waters made the mountain green with swamp verdure.
In the hollow our path was dim, splashy, and erratic.
At last we came to a ruined cottage, nearly opposite the tree before mentioned.
Here we lost the path again, and found also that the River Liza was between us and Black Sail.
Whichever way we turned the swamp began to swallow us as if it was hungry.
Night was coming on; fits of heavy rain began to fall; and mist-laden winds raged savagely around as if they were glad to catch us in such a place at such a time.
We found that we must move on at once or be benighted there, which would have put an unpleasant finish to that day's journey.
Dashing recklessly through the swamp, we waded the stream, and clambered over the rocks, as straight as possible towards the tree.
We drew near it, and looked about; but the dark steep seemed pathless.
We went nearer, and, to our delight perceived a narrow path, about a hundred yards to the right of the tree.
Wet, and hot with exertion, we paused to take breath.
If we could keep this track, there would be just about daylight enough to see us over the mountain.
We found this pass wilder than Scarf Gap, but we worked in that howling storm, up to the top, when the rain ceased, and we felt comparatively comfortable.
After our difficulties that wild October nightfall, I was not much surprised to find that" Black's Guide" calls this route to Wastdale" so perplexing, that although the hardy pedestrian, with very minute directions, might succeed in finding his way over the mountains, yet every one who has crossed them will be aware of the danger of the attempt, and of the fatal consequences attending a diversion from the right path."
After this, the following passage from a letter to the editor, appear in the same volume: -" The passes at Scarf Gap and Black Sail should not be attempted late in the season without a guide, for the following reasons: A friend and myself left the inn at Buttermere this morning, on our way to Wastdale, in a heavy rain, being pressed for time.
We reached the summit at Scarf Gap, and descended into the Ennerdale valley with tolerable success, in spite of a cold north-east wind and driving rain; we also ascended Black Sail about half way, when my friend's pony, a hardy and powerful animal, came to a standstill.
I then pushed on alone, on foot, to find a better track for the pony, and had attained so close to the summit as to see the platform, as it were, within my reach, when prolonged wet and cold produced such severe numbness and faintness, that I had barely strength to return to my companion, whom I found very little better off than myself.
But for a flask of brandy in his bag, I do not think that we could have ever left the valley alive; as it was, we had barely power to make our way through the swamps, rocks, and swollen torrents of the Liza.
Never but once before did I feel so near the gates of death."
This looks like putting too dark a colour upon the matter; but, even in fine weather, it is very desirable for a stranger to have some spare daylight to work in when crossing these passes.
From the summit of Black Sail the road was more distinct, and not so steep; and there was more of what dalesmen call" green travelling" about it.
In some places, however, the rain had made it as much a river as a road.
We descended rapidly, crossing from point to point of the winding path; and being already wet and soiled, a boot-full of water, or a slip in the swamp, was no great matter.
A mountain torrent roared down this wild pass, between Pillar on the right, and Kirkfell on the left.
When we came into that part of Wastdale Head called Mosedale, the sublime appearance of Pillar was such as I cannot express.
The expiring light of day was struggling with the still hovering storm; and through the clouds a strange, unearthly light settled upon the awful summit and steeps of that mountain, which, somehow, called Horeb and Sinai to mind.
A mile's walk from the foot of the pass brought us to the Huntsman's Inn, the house of William Ritson, the well-known guide at Wastdale Head.
Wet and weary we walked in at the kitchen door, just as night was lapping the wild mountains in its overpowering gloom.
A servant girl was placing candles on a long, heavy table under the window, by which four men sat waiting for their supper.
The storm was rising again, and the wind roared in the wide chimney as if it was challenging the fire to come and have a round with it outside; but the cheerful house-warmer went on with its play, and looked round with a graceful smile as if it wished above all things that Mrs. Ritson would bring more pans with meat in, that it might set to and cook something for the good of the company.
The fender was one half of a heavy tram-wheel.
In a corner, at the table end, a thoughtful-looking man, in military undress, sat turning over some papers.
He belonged to the ordinance service.
A very tall, stark man, about sixty, sat on a low chair by the fire.
His wiry hair was sprinkled with grey, and his long, weather-worn face beamed with manly benevolence.
A little white-headed lad stood between his knees, playing with a book.
Muttering to himself, he climbed the old man's limbs, unbuttoned his waistcoat, and poked his fingers into his ears, like a kitten teasing a Newfoundland dog. "
Fadder, what's this?"
and" Fadder, look here!"
said he, with all the healthy restlessness of a child" that feels its life in every limb."
The old man was talking to someone else, and he took little heed, till the lad pulled his hair, the wrong way, which made hm wince.
He then set him down on the floor, and said," Lile lads should be varra still when folk's talking."
The lad was still for a minute or two, and then he bagan again, -" Fadder; - fadder, see yo.
Aa can say that off by heart.
Fadder, it is n't bedtime yet, is it?"
" Well," said his father," that just depends whether lile lads are quiet or not.
Hesto hed thi poddish?"
" Aye."
" Well then, thoo must behave thisen, like a good boy, or else thoo'll hev to gan to bed at yance, now."
The little fellow retreated, pouting, towards his mother, and muttered," Ye du swagger becos yer my fadder!"
This hale old man was William Ritson, the Wastdale guide.
Opposite to him sat Jackson, the Barrowdale guide, a square-built, strong man, with a round face.
He had brought a gentleman over Sty Head pass, early in the evening.
Behind Ritson, a stout young fellow, with a flushed countenance, was smoking and swinging back and forward upon the hind legs of his chair.
The called him" Willie the Waller."
He was a stone-mason;" a girt awkertly fell-heed dal lad," and, as I learned afterwards," a gay good hand at levelling rough lumps o' cheese."
A fine young fox-hound, called" Crowner," was snuffing about the kitchen, and a staid-looking sheep-dog, called" Boy," lay asleep before the fire.
The two guides were talking about food for dogs. "
Poddish an' milk," said Ritson," poddish an' milk for dogs!
It keeps em reight.
Now, a pound o' meal a day would sarra thooar lile dogs varra weel - thou."
" Aye, varra weel," said Jackson.
And thus the talk went on during the time we stayed in the kitchen.
Te storm was raging again outside, and every time the door opened the wet blast swept fiercely in.
We went to bed early, intending to go down Wast Water in a boat next morning, and so forward to Drigg.
But we will say something more about Wastdale Head in another chapter.
Chapter The Sixth. "
By my halidome, A scene so rude, so wild as this, Yet so sublime in barrenness, Never did my wandering footsteps press, Wherever I happed to roam."
Scott.
When morning came we found a great storm raging through Wastdale Head.
All was wild uproar out-side.
The heavy rain blinded our window with its fierce assault; and the mist was so dense that we could see no more of the landscape than a little nooks of the garden below, in which a few currant bushes were struggling frantically to keep hold of the ground they grew in.
A sound of rushing waters mingled with the elemental din, rising wildly in the surrounding gloom whenever the hurricane paused a minute to take breath.
The swollen torrent form Kirkfell went madly by the rear of the house, too big for its bed; and every channel that seamed the rocky steeps around was full of wild water.
When the misty curtains parted an instant, we could see the white currents dashing down the dark side of Yewbarrow, close by the house.
This storm continued through the whole day, and all who had passed the night at the" Huntsman's Inn" were weather - bound.
The Borrowdale guide was there; and the gentleman he had brought over Sty Head Pass was now waiting impatiently alone in his little room for a favourable change of the weather.
In addition to these there was Ritson and his grown-up son; the ordnance surveyor;" Willie the Waller;" three farmers from lower Wastdale; and Ritson's father, a shrewd, grey-headed old dalesman, retired from active life.
These, with Ritson's wife, his little lad, and two servants, made up a curious storm-prisoned company.
Most of this number passed the greater part of the day merrily, in a detached building close to the house; but Ritson and the Borrowdale guide, with one or two others, kept steadily to the kitchen, and " Got planted unco right, Fast by the ingle, bleezing finely."
To ourselves it was a disappointment to be pent up in the heart of that sublime group of mountains, Yewbarrow, Pillar, Great Gable, Kirkfell, Lingmell, and Scawfell, - and yet unable to behold them.
But it was something to feel that, although unseen, they were standing awfully around us in the tempestuous gloom.
Our little parlour faced the storm; and we had a bright fire in it.
There was an accordion and a few books in the window-sill; and we got through the wild day very well.
On the previous night Ritson had spoken doubtfully of the weather, and he had advised us not to attempt the ascent of Scawfell.
All chance of climbing that mountain during our visit was now gone, and we made the best of the matter.
In the course of the day I went into the kitchen now and then, to talk with the company there.
Ritson was full of tales of the mountains.
Speaking of the wild of the wild crag which gives name to Pillar - the great mountain between Wastdale Head and Ennerdale Head, he said there was a bottle deposited upon it, containing some half dozen names of people who had climbed to the top of it.
The last man who ascended was Baumgarten. "
Before Baumgarten set oot," said Ritson," he left his watch an' his purse an' a note, an' he said if he never cam' back, a' would be mine.
Aa went a lang way up with him," continued he," but aa tell' t hm aa wadn't gang to t' top.
Aa knew t' way varra weel; but aa did n't like to engage it again.
So he axed me what were tereason, an' aa tell' t him aaed mair nor mysel' to think on now, an' it was ower big a risk.
Bud, nowt wad sarra, bud he must gang; so he shook hands wi' me, an aa gev him t' best instructions aa could, an' he went forret, and he was seen soon after sitting stride-legs upo' t' edge o' t' rock, sheawting an' waving his hat.
He left his neam i' t' bottle at top; an' a gay time we hed when he cam' down again safe and sound."
I asked whether travellers were not sometimes lost on the mountains. "
Aye, aye," said the Borrowdale guide. "
Aye," said Ritson;" here was two gat lost upo' Scawfell yaa cold neet i' March, two year sin.
They were oot all neet upo' t' mountain, an' yan o' em cam down here about seven i' t' mornin, sair deun up.
He tell' t us as wel as he could where we could find his friend.
Heed bin force' t to leave him upo' t' fell.
Poor fellow, he was varra ill, an' he hung a terrible lang crag, for he was freeten't that his comrade wadn't live till we gat tull him.
Well, me an' Daniel Braithut, t' farmer, set oot wi' a lile bitch called' Crafty,' - an' she was crafty an' all.
We hed hard wark to keep uo wi' her.
Bud she made straight ahead, an' when we gat tull him t' lile thing was lcking t' blood off his hand, an' she look' t sorry, as if she ken't that it was a hard case.
Heed hed two or three fits afore we gat up, an' he was quite wandering in his mind, an' imagining' at he was gannin to be murdered.
We tell' t him that his comrade had sent us wi' summat for him to eat an' drink, but he kept saying' No, no; aa hev nae money!'
Ye see, he was terrible freeten't at we was efter his money.
At last, we gat a sup o' wine int'll him, an' a bite o' summat to eat.
But, when we gat him into t' sun, t' poor fellow was varra ill, sure-ly.
His even was white an' wild, an' he wander' t in his talk; an' he was as helpless as a teeam seck.
We hed to dad him on softly, little by little, for he was like a man wi' two wood legs.
In a lile bit, he axt for mair wine, an' aa knew by that he was coming round, so aa began to give it to hin i' less sups.
We gat him safe down, an' he was varra ill for two or three days; but, he cam tull at last.
His name was P--, of Whitehaven; an' aa believe he gat on varra weel at efter."
" Aa've sin war cases not that," said the Borrowdale guide. "
Aye, aye," said Ritson;" they do n't awlus get off sea weel as that."
The Borrowdale guide was a shoemaker, in addition to his other occupations; and taking up a shoe from the floor, he turned it over critically, like unto one having understanding in such things; and, holding it up, he said" William, aa've made shoon, see ye, that aa could ha' put that i' t inside on.
They was Big Lord's; what, ye'll ken him weel enough."
" Ken him, aye," said Ritson. "
An' then, here's John Fisher o' Newlands.
He takes a girt shoe," continued the Borrowdale guide. "
Aye," said Ritson," aa ken him too, varra weel.
He hes a most serious foot hes John.
There'll not be so mony mair nor two in a yard ov his measurment, aa sud say."
" Two!
Will there be two, think ye?"
" Well, varra nee."
" Well, then," continued the Borrowdale guide," there was Newland Dwarf.
He was annuder; a girt, strang, stark-like fellow.
He was se tal, that he yance turned all t' public-hoose signs i' Keswick t' wrang way aboot i' t' neet-time.
Dan.
t' policeman, was sent to tek him up; but he did n't like o' t job, for he knew t' Dwarf was a dangerous chap to mell on, and he mud happen get his licks, reight off-hand.
Se Dan went cannily aboot it; an' when he fand him drinking in a public-hoose, he whispered tull him, in a friendly way like, what he was aboot.
Well, t' Dwarf happened to be in a good temper; an' he axt Dan if he would hev a glass afore they started.
Dan said he wad, an' he was varra glad, too, - for Dan was awlus a good takker.
But, this time, he teuk an' teuk, glass efter glass, till he was clean dune up; an' what does t' Dwarf do, but whip t' handcuffs upo' poor Dan, an' turns him oot a doors.
** Now, there was a trick for ye, William."
" Aye," said Ritson," that caps Cut Lugs.
But it's just like the man.
Aa've heerd Adam Tyson tell on him.
Now Adam was another queer-like chap.
He was an aad guide, gentleman, that use' t to be here.
Whenivver Parson Hodgkinson an' his wife cam up to Wastdale Head in a boat, they wad hev aad Adam with' em, an' nabody else.
Ye see, he could spin a long yarn aboot a thing, an' he was cant an' comical, - that's how it was.
Well, as ye come up Wast Water, here's places where there's good echoes, an' Adam heving a strang voice, t' parson wad hev him to shout for t' echo, - so he shouted,' A - dam!'
varra loud an' slaw; an' t' echo answer' t' A - dam!'
Then t' parson tried, with hs short thin voice, an' there was naa answer to his cry, for t' echo had nowt to work on, ye see.
They axt Adam how it was, an' he said it was varra likely because t' echo did n't ken' em.
Well, another day, when he was shouting for t' parson an' his wife, as usual, -' A - dam!'
aad Robert Briggs happened to be upo t' crags, an' he called out,' Here am I!'
T' parson was quite surprised, till Adam tell' t him that it varra offens did so when it was in a good humour."
Thus the talk wandered on, quaint and simple, from one thing to another, on that stormy day.
The chapel at Wastdale Head is one of the smallest in England.
Ritson told us of an old parson of Wastdale who kept a churn-full of sermons, which he used to preach down to the bottom, then turn over and begin again. "
Yan Sunday," said he," when t' aad priest cam to t' forenoon sarvice, what should he see but Birkett, t' clerk, straddle' t upo t' chapel rigging with a girt hammer in his hand. '
Why, Birkett,' says he,' whatever are ye doing there?'
' Well,' says Birkett,' ye see sic a yan hes borrowed t' bell-rap to lead hay wi', sea aa's cum up a-ringing t' sarvice in wi' t' coal-hammer,'" He said, also, that the same parson was so puzzled with the writing in his sermon one dark winter's forenoon, that he stopped, and, handing the manuscript to the clerk, he said," Birkett, just go to the window, and see what that word is," This reminded me of an anecdote concerning a little moreland church in Lancashire, where the clerk having given out a psalm to be sung at a certain tune, a round-faced rustic leaned over the front of the organ-loft, and called out," Sammul, thae know very weel' at we connot sing that tune to-day, becose Jack's gwon to a wedding in Rossenda', an' he's taen o' the music wi' him."
Ritson told of a parson in a little Cumberland village, who, finding one Sunday forenoon that his whole congregation consisted of three of his intimate neighbours, hesitated before beginning the service, and said to them," What think ye three men if we all go up t'' Mortal Man' public-house, an' hev a pint of ale a-piece?"
I was most interested in Ritson's anecdotes of famous men who had visited Wastdale.
He had wandered many a day with Professor Wilson, Wordsworth, Professor Sedgwick, De Quincey, and others.
He spoke of Wordsworth as" a varra quiet-like aad man, who had nea pride aboot him, an' varra lile to say."
But Professor Wilson" Banged' em all for fun."
Ritson had been a famous wrestler in his youth, and had won many a country belt in Cumberland.
He once wrestled with Wilson, and threw him twice out of three falls.
But he owned that the Professor was" a varra bad un to lick."
Wilson beat him at jumping.
He could jump twelve yards in three jumps, with a great stone in each hand.
Ritson could only imagine eleven and three - quarters. "
T' first time at Professor Wilson cam to Wasd' le Head," said Ritson," he hed a tent set up in a field, an' he gat it weel stock' t wi' bread, an' beef, an' cheese, an' rum, an' ale, an' sic like.
Then he gidder' t up my granfadder, an' Thomas Tyson, an' Isaac Fletcher, an' Joseph Stable, an' aad Robert Grave, and some mair; an' there was gay deed amang' em.
Then, nowt would sarra bud he would hev a boat, and they must all hev a sail.
Well, when they gat into t' boat, he tell' t' em to be particklar careful, for he was liable to git giddy i' t' hed; an' ig yan ov his giddy fits sud chance to cum on he mus happen tummle into t' watter.
Well, that pleased' em all gaily weel, an' they said theyed tak varra girt care on him.
Then he leaned back an' called oot that they must pull quicker.
So they did; and what does Wilson do then but topples ower eb'm ov his back i' t' watter, with a splash.
Then there was a girt cry -' Eh, Mr. Wilson's i' t' watter!
Mr. Wilson's i' t' watter!
an yan click' t, an' annuder click' t; but nen o' them could get hod on him, and there was sek a scrowe as nivver.
At last, yan o' them gat him round t' neck as he popped up at tel o' t' boat; an' Wilson taad him to kep a good hod, for he mud happen slip him agen.
But what, it was nowt but yan ov his bits o' pranks - he was snurking an' laughing all t' time.
Wilson was a fine, gay, girt-hearted fellow, as strang as a lion, and as lish as a trout; an he hed sek antics as nivver man hed.
Whativver ye sed tull him yeed get your change for it gaily soon** Aa remember there was a' Murry Neet' at Wastd' le Head that varra time; an' Wilson an' t' aad parson was there amang t' rest.
When theyed gotten a bit on, Wilson med a sang aboot t' parson.
He med it reight off o' t' stick end.
He began wi' t' parson first, then he gat to't Pope, and then he turned it to the devil, an' sic like, till he hed' em falling off their cheers wi' fun.
T' parson was quite astonished, an' rayder vext an' all, but at last he brust oot laughing wi' t' rest.
He was like.
Naabody could stand it.
** T' sem neet there was yan o' thier wives cum to fetch her husban' hem, an' she was rayder ower strang i' t' tung wi' him afore t' hel compeny.
Well, he took it all i' good part, but, as he went away, he shouted oot to t' aad minister,' Od dang ye, parson, it wor ye at teed us two tegidder!
'** It was a' life an murth amang us as lang as Professor Wilson was at Wasd' le Head."
When evening came, the three farmers and one or two others who had been making merry in the little detached building near the house, came into the kitchen.
They had spent the greatest part of the day in chaffering about the last half - crown that stood between their striking a bargain for a certain heifer.
This was still going on when they came in.
All quiet talk was at an end; and the mirth grew fast and furious.
They would dispute noisily, tossing a luck penny to and fro, and clashing their hands, and twisting and twining the terms of bargain, in the hope of gaining a shilling or two of advantage on either side, and then, finding it a matter of diamond cut diamond, they would turn away from each other, vowing not to budge a penny nearer, and seeming to give up the whole thing.
Then there would arise a little generous contention between them about who should pay for the next glasses; and in this manner each man spent three or four times the amount in dispute during the course of the day.
A nightfall they were getting" glorious;" and the elder and more talkative of the two would suddenly whisk away, as if he did n't care a flirt for the heifer, and begin to sing: - " Iv they ax whoar I cum fra, I say the Fell seyde, Where fadder an' mudder an' honest fwok beyde; An' my sweetheart, God bliss her!
she thowt nin leyke me, For when we shuik hans, the tears gushed frev her e' e." " Well, cum, Willie Ritson;' here's fra hurse heels, cart wheels, bum-baillies, bad wedder, an' the divvul, Lord deliver us - an' incline us to keep a good law.
'** Here's a lock o' ye hes a lile bit o' religion; but ye hevn't laid it oot yet.
Mebby, yeere fleyed o' t being deun too soon.
Aa guess ye think it'll come to chickens i' t end, iv ye nobbut keep sitting o' t, sem as they du wi' hen-eggs.
But, what; theyere varra weel kept at God keeps, as t' saying is, Willie: - ' On I whusseled, an' wondered; my bundle I flung Owre my shou' der, when Cwoley he after me sprung, An' howled, slly fellow!
an' fawned at my fit, As if to say -' Watty!
we munnet part yet!'"
He seemed to have taken a dislike to a young man who sat smoking dreamily in a corner, for every time he spoke the old farmer began," Hod thi tung, thoo fozzy fel.
Aa'll ding tho ower i' now!""
What; aa's like to speak amang t' rest, is n't aa?"
said the young fellow. "
There's ne call for that," replied the other. "
Them as knaas nowt sud say nowt.
Hod thi tung!
Thoo sits glowran an stewan i' t neuk like a mazy hullert.
It makes mo crop-sick.
Hod thi tung, thoo ill-mannert mule, or a'll gi tho a clonk o' t heed!""
What aa said was varra innocent," replied the young fellow. "
Ne, ne; there's nowt innocent aboot tho, except aboot t' en, an' below t' knee - ne wheers else; not an inch o' tho."
" Cum, Robert, yeere rayder ower hard on him, - divvent ye think se?"
" Thoo's as bad as him," quoth the farmer. "
Ye two maks yaa divvul; yan carries t' hurns an' tudder t' tel."
The Borrowdael guide now turned the conversation upon some person in a neighbouring dale, of whom Ritson said:" All' at he ails is' at he connut bide condition.
It's like yan' o these young cowts' at gans aboot' i March, low i' flesh an' hingin it heed, for ivver under yan's feet, like an aad pet geuss.
But wait a little bit, tull ye've gan it a lock o' corn, an bens, an' bran, an' then see what it'll do for ye** Whenivver aa see folk at connut bide condition, aa think theyere raytherly wanting at top end o' their person.
What should be their best room is varra lile better nor a lumber-shop."
" Weel dune, Willie," said the garrulous old farmer. "
Yeere talking weel, aad lad!
Yeere i' girt cue this neet.
Canny Cumberlan' for ivver, agen the world!
Daal Hed lads for ivver an' a day!
- A - men!
- an' incline us to keep a good law!"
" Our Ellik likes fat bacon weel; An' haver-bannocks pleases Dick, A cowt-lword meks layle Wully fain, An' cabbish never turns Phillip sick.
Our dream's for gurdle-keaks an' tea; An' Betty's aw for thick pez-keal; Let ilk yen fancy what they wull, Still mey deleyte is gud strang yell."
Cum, aa'll just hev anudder glass, an' then*** Wheer's t' bell?"
" We hev ne bell i' t' kitchen," said Ritson;" knock o' t' teble."
" Aa've a good mind to fling t' tengs to't back o' t' door, t' sem as they du i' Trubbeck," replied the farmer. "
But here shoo is.
*** Whisky - an' het water?
Cum, William, aad lad!
ye'll keep mo company in annuder?"
" Ne mair for me, te-neet," sad Ritson. "
Du!
Just annuder!
Cum?"
" Na aas not varra weel."
" Well, ye knaa t' best."
Then he sang again - " Deuce tek the clock, click-cleckan se, Still in a body's ear, It tells an' tells the time's gen by When Johnny sud bin here; Deuce tek the wheel,'t will nit rin roond, - Nea mair te neet aa'll spin, But count each minute with a sigh, Till -" " Cum, now, what d' ye say aboot yon heifer?
It's gettin late; an, aas off!"
Nay, aa tell't ye Robert; aa'll nut tak a skurrick less, - hev it or leave it.
There is n't a lishier beast, nor yen fuller o' promse i' a' Wastd' le.
Aa's nut sea varra keen o' parting wi' t." " What, aa knaa what it is varra weel, an' aav bid weel tu.
Ye've deun it nea good wi letting it lig oot thooar raggy neets.
Bud, cum now, aa'll tell ye what aa'll du.
Aa'll turn ye a shlling back, an' stan' glasses."
" Nay, aa'll not budge."
Well, then, we'll drop it. "
The hunt's up through the wood, Through the wood, through the wood; The hunts up through the wood," An' aa's gannin hem, - heifer or ne heifer."
And thus we left them going on, long after Ritson's little lad had finished his poddish and gone to bed; and stormy night had closed over Wastdale Head once more.
When morning came the rain had sunk to fitful showers, with a steady drizzle between.
The mist was getting lighter, and though moaning winds came up the vale, the elements seemed tired of contention, and the storm was evidently abating.
The little green level at Wastdale head was becoming more visible, but the mountains that shut it out from the world were all still concealed, except the lower part of Yewbarrow, close by the river.
We agreed to wait till noon.
My friend sat down to read whilst I wandered about stables, shippons, and bracken-bedded yards, tooting into the nooks of the outbuildings.
One corner especially interested me; it was a dusty little library of eloquent symbols - a doorless shed, with a low wooden floor above, up to which a short, rough ladder led.
The place was crammed with peat, firewood, brackens, cart gear, staves, dairy utensils, old pieces of house furniture, sacks, ropes, oars, fishing nets, alpen-stocks, scythes, and tumbled heaps of cobwebbed rustic lumber.
Everything there was a little volume written over with quaint records of lonely mountain life, and the musty air inside seemed thick with country story.
I pored over this nook with pleasure, and as there was not much of the landscape to be seen, I spent most of the forenoon roaming about that simple, but roomy and comfortable old house.
The shrubs and bushes in the garden had got over their stormy troubles, and were now swaying quietly in the quiet wind.
About twelve, the old gentleman from Borrowdale came forth, swathed in warm wrappages, mounted his pony, and rode cannily westward through the mist, with his stout guide striding behind him.
Others of the weather-bound company began to" Tak' the gate."
Among the general thaw, we also bade adieu to brave old Ritson and the" Huntsman's Inn," and melted away into the west.
We had fifteen miles travel from Wastdale head to the station at Drigg.
The first mile was a splashy walk, leading to the lake; after that the road was hard, and good, winding pleasantly along the open northern shore of Wast Water, as if to afford every possible variety of view.
This lake is three miles and a half long, and half a mile broad.
Its depth is about forty - five fathoms.
As we went on, the sky became clearer, and the whole length of that solemn water lay still before us.
The entire opposite shore was over-frowned by the dark precipitous ridge of rock called" The Screes," rising sheer from the lake, savage and sublime, till hovering mists hid the summits, leaving imagination to build the crags beyond, as lofty and as wild as it had power to soar and shape them.
But the shore along which we walked was a different scene.
On the left hand, the ripple of Wast Water upon its pebbled shore attended us all the way.
On the right, picturesque moorlands sloped aloft irregularly to where sterile crags were lapped in cloud.
All over these lower slopes beds of moss, heather and fern, - one glowing vernal sunset, - interspersed with many - tinted rocks, covered the mountain side with splendid hues.
Now and then, a little silver rill ran across the road, easily stridden over; and in some places, a larger streamlet dashed beneath, in noisy glee, bridged over by the road.
As we went on, some parts of the shore were fringed with tall, thich bushes of gorse, looking freshly green after the rain; and green mounds, of all shapes, began to appear, with mossy rocks cropping out beautifully upon them.
The gloomy" Screes" still overawe the opposite shore.
We are drawing near the foot of Wast Water.
The wind has gone down, and murmurs of quiet water are heard around.
High up among the misty crags we can hear the lonely bleating of wandering sheep," the plaintive spirits of the solitude."
Much as I was pleased with this visit to Wast Water, in spite of untoward weather, every time I turned round to look back as we came away, I was more and more convinced that the most impressive way of visiting Wastdale Head is to approach it from the west.
We lingered a few minutes among the rich woods of Wastdale Hall, at the foot of the lake.
The whole route from this point down to the sea is full of fertile picturesque beauty.
After dining at the village of strands, which is a favorable halting-place for tourists visiting Wast Water, we walked on in the evening to Drigg Station, through a country of hill and dell, wood and water, as rich and soft as the country we had left behind was sterile and sublime.
The village of Stainton Bridge, on this route, is a very charming nook.
We were in good time for the train at Drigg; and rode home to Ulverstone by the light of the moon.
Silverdale.
Chapter The First. '
Tis sweet in pleasant Silverdale, All in the blossom-tide, To watch the hardy fisher's sail Over the blue waters glide.
There, changeful ocean's murmuring waves Sing to the smiling lea; - A paradise upon the land.
And wonders in the sea.Quiet Silverdale, down by the sea!
I sometimes think it strange that I should have lived so long in Lancashire without hearing of the place before.
But there are few people who really know what wealth of natural beauty lies within easy reach of them.
The traveller who comes to Silverdale station for the first time may, perhaps, feel disappointed as he looks at the limestone ridges which shut the vale from view.
He will, very likely, think it a bleak prospect; but a little way westward over that rocky upland, there is a secluded land of corn and cream, of bosky dells, and lush pastures, rolling in irregular green waves, between the hills of Trowbarrow and Middlebarrow, down to the Morecambe shore.
The life of this retired spot is all rural repose.
The pike-fisher loves to dream by the side of its lonely tarn.
The sportsman's gun is often heard in its woods and vales; for it is a pleasant place to him.
And, sometimes, the foxhunter's horn wakes the echoes of the rocky heights which bound the scene.
This, however, is a comparatively rare sound there; but, when it is heard, the farmer leaves his land, and the fisherman his creel, to follow the chase a-foot, until" tailed-off" by the length of the run.
But, at ordinary times, and when the sea is asleep, the sounds in Silverdale are of a quiet kind.
The stranger wandering there may hear a dog bark, or a cock crow, now and then; and sometimes a cart goes jolting slowly by.
A cheery babble a fireside talk may reach him as he passes some solitary homestead; he may be startled by the dinless pad of a bare-footed fisherman returning from the sea; he may hear the low of cattle, or a ploughman's whistle, and that unpremeditated minstrelsy of the woods which is hardly ever quite at rest there; but ruder sounds than these will rarely reach his listening ear.
** Some parts of Silverdale are as lonely yet as when the tramp of Roman legions startled the wolf and hill-fox in the wild woods of Trowbarrow.
*** It is a land of brown fishers, fleet footmen, and ploughmen famous in the north of England.
Its mighty sands are stored with disasters of the sea; its rocky shores with superstitions of the soil.
And any thoughtful man who wanders there long, and is not baked up in a crust of pride which prevents free communion with his kind, will find a volume of interest in the quaint manners, language, and peculiar way of life of its inhabitants.
** But I must betake myself to my own experiences of a visit to the place.
Our northern spring, that fickle pet of the poet's song, is, sometimes, a season of much unsettled temper, that it is pleasanter to read of its" delights" by a comfortable fireside, or hear them sung of in a concert-room, than go in search of them outside; that is, if you happen to be asthmatical, or anything of that kind.
*** Well; the particular spring of which I am speaking, opened cold and raw, with a keen east wind; and I went sneezing to the station, where I found several cold people walking about, on the day when I set off to see Silverdale for the first time.
My spirits rose as we rode away.
It is wonderful, sometimes, how soon that renovation which comes from change of air, and still more, I think, from change of scene, begins to work upon a man, stirring his entire constitution with beneficial alteration.
I found it so at this time.
Of course the good effect of these trips to new places, depends as much upon judicious diet and exercise there, as good health depends upon them anywhere else.
And I think that there is some danger, even in the mere matter of eating, in giving way to the sudden stimulus which the appetite often receives from its first contact with the sea-breeze.
I have known people who have gone to the seaside to get rid of some weariness arising from town life, who have returned again, wondering how it was they were browner in face, and yet little or no better in health.
And the reason has sometimes been that they lived as foolishly there as at home.
This, however, is all out of the way.
It was about four in the afternoon when we reached Silverdale station.
As we came along, the country looked greener, the birds were blither, the sun shone brighter, and the air was more pure and balmy.
This might partly arise from the fact that we were approaching a warmer soil.
It was almost like coming out of the tail of winter into summer in a three hours ride.
*** There are two roads from the station into Silverdale.
Sending part of my luggage forward by a lad, I took up the left hand, over the ridge which conceals the vale.
This road is rather shorter than the other, being about a mile and a quarter to what may be called the village part of Silverdale.
But the homesteads of Silverdale are so scattered, so dropped about in nooks and on knolls, almost out of sight of one another - as if each liked to have a good deal of green country to itself - that one can hardly say, with propriety, that there is a village there.
What I mean, however, by" the village part" is, that part nearest to the sea, where the two hotels, and the little hat-full of a post-office, with three or four other dwellings, stand, within a few yards of one another.
*** The road had a broad grassy border; and bleak limestone rocks, partly grown over with hazels, thorns, furze, and savin-bushes, rise in a wild way, though not very high, on the right-hand side.
** There was nobody in sight but the lad, going a-head, with parcels slung over his shoulder, and an old woman, who stopped to cough now and then, as she laboured slowly upward with a basket on her arm.
The lad went on with his burden as frisky as a kittlin; but the poor old sould with the empty basket was soon overtaken.
**" Fine day, owd woman," said I, slackening my walk. "
Aye, varra;" replied she, giving another cough;" an' aa do think' at we sall hev some fine wedder now, too.
Mester Fawsutt said as t' glass was getting up this morning - he did.""
Is that mister Fawcett o' the Victoria Inn?"
said I.
She stopped, and coughed again; and after wiping her face with a little cotton handkerchief, and looking at me for a second or two, she replied," Sewer, it is.
** Ye see I'm a bit troubled wi' the asthmatic.
** Varra nice man, Mester Fawsutt."
" How far is it to his house?"
said I."
How far?
why, about a mile."
Here she gave another cough; and continued," Ye'll see t' sign bi t' road-side."
Then she looked at me again, and said," Wor ye nivver here afore?"
" Never."
" Well; its a nice place is Silverdal'.
It's sich good air.
** Here's a deal of folk comes tull it' at's oot i' health,"" How far am I from Silverdale?"
said I."
Why," replied the old woman," Yeere in Silverdal' now, in a manner.
But it's near a mile yet to wheer teere ganging' to.
** I sall hev to call at Jossy Trotter's, down t' lane, yonder."
" Well, goody day, od lady," said I."
Good day to ye!
Keep t' road, an' ye cannot git wrang."
I thanked her, and sped on.
The lad with his parcels had disappeared round a turn, and the poor old body was soon out of sight behind.
I am now on the level upland which divides Silverdale into two parts.
On each hand, wooded hills close the view; and in the far north-east behind me, the Cumberland mountains arise in tumultuous grandeur, tipped with sunshine.
The sea is little more than a mile off, but not yet in sight.
Yonder, the plumy top of Arnside Knott peeps over the long ridge of Middlebarrow; and, on the opposite side, rocky Trowbarrow, and, south of that, Wharton Crag, are the enclosing heights.
The rugged portal of Silverdale is now down in the rear, and I see that the country is prettily feathered with woodlands, and the cultivated land very fertile.
Every sight and sound is suggestive of quietness and rural life; and the sleepy joy which pervades the scene steals soothingly into the mind.
Now and then, the westering sunbeam comes full in my face; and I turn aside to look a minute into the refreshing shade of a bye-lane, all carpeted with moist grass.
It has a bowery, untrodden look, and seems to wind away under the embracing trees, to some retired spot of greenery" where rural fays and fairies dwell."
As I go along, a pass a solitary" lane cow," belonging to some landless cottager.
The poor man's cow never lifts her head to look, but goes on audibly cropping the short grass by the wayside.
Over the hedges I get a glimpse, here and there, of sleeker kine browsing lazily in richer pastures; and, in yonder field, there is a young horse galloping round in frantic glee, and lashing his heels into the air, as if trying to break away from the tether of an imaginary cart.
Now he tramps defiantly up to the hedge-side, and looks over at me.
I flourish my stick, and he gives a loud snort, and gallops off again, wilder than before.
Here is a broad field of newly-furrowed land, where birds are busy among the chocolate-coloured soil; and.
by the green roadside, yonder, there is a rabbit, which hears my footsteps, and runs up the hedge into a plantation hard by.
Now, I heard a dog barking.
** It is up at the corner of the lane, a-head, where smoke is rising from two low-built cottages under the trees.
A donkey-cart emerges from the lane, loaded with hampers and bags of fish, - flooks and cockles, I guess.
The brown old driver on the front of the cart chucks his head aside towards me as he passes, and says," Well; yaar comin!""
I'm coming, say I; and away goes the cart down the road; with the dog leaping up at the donkey's mouth, and barking, while the hills seem to toss the sound about upon the quiet scene.
And yet, when I come to the corner of the lane, I hear the birds making a gleeful coil in the woods below, as if they were rehearsing a kind of" Hallelujah Chorus" of their own, to finish the day with.
** I pass a tasteful villa in a garden, with walks that look almost too trim for ordinary footing; and then the gables of a larger mansion appear above the trees, on the opposite side.
This house is very pictu - resquely seated upon a smooth lawn, which slopes softly to the edge of a great limestone precipice.
The rugged front of the rock is cushioned and festooned prettily in some places with its native greeneries; and at the foot of it, there is a beautiful little vale, called" Levens Bottoms."
The little vale runs away southward in a long woody glen, towards Warton Sands.
Down in the green holm there are half a dozen or more cows grazing; and a man in his shirt sleeves is trimming a hedge.
I am almost sure I hear the clip of his shears, it is such a quaint place.
There is a little girl tripping along a field-path, on the opposite slope, with a can in her hand, as if fetching water from some well in the wood beyond.
She is singing too; and the birds seem to mock her and make fun of her as she goes heedlessly on.
All else is still in the little dell.
When I got to the top of the next knoll, Morecambe Bay was at the foot of the slope before me.
It is a fine sight from any part of these shores; but I think the view is more comprehensive from some points of Silverdale, than from anywhere else.
I began to think myself near my destination, for smoke was curling up here and there among the trees below.
But there was a small shop at the roadside, where I went and inquired for the Victoria Inn.
The mistress came forth, and shewed me the gables of the house, about two - hundred yards off, on the right hand.
A little lower in the road, I found a sign-post pointing up to the house.
It is a large, plain, white-washed building upon high ground, looking over a few sloping fields, right out to sea.
I went through a small enclosure, half garden half lawn, up to a kind of private door at the end.
I knocked, and it was opened by a tall, mild-faced old woman, dressed in black.
She wore an old-fashioned white cap, with a broad black ribbon running over the head of it; and her clean apron was of blue lin check. "
Is this Mr. Fawcett's house?"
said I."
Yes."
" I sent some luggage up just now."
" Oh, is it you sir?
come in.
do.
Why, we had your friend here about a fortnight since.
We rather expected you last week.
** Stop; I'll call our master.
** Fawcett!"
Then came a broad-set old farmer-like man, with a humorous countenance.
She told him my name. "
Oh; how d' ye do.
What, you've come at last!
The lad's browt your things."
Then laying his hand on my shoulder, he said," Now; yeere not' good health; - so, tek care, an' we'll soon doctor yo up again, ye'll see.
Fresh air, an' kitchen physic, an' quietness, - that's the thing!
Now, I find Silverdale pills suit my complaint very well.
** Aa'll lay a guinea ye do n't know what they are!""
No, I do n't."
" Why, theyere beef-steak dumplings, to be sure.
What, ye come fra Manchester, an' not know what a frog-i' - the hold pudding is?
But, stop; hev ye hed your tea?"
" No.
"**" Come, my lass," said he to his wife," he wants his tea?"
" It shal be ready in ten minutes, sire," said the old lady; and away she went. "
Well, now," continued he," while tha's doing, I'll just shew you your rooms.
**" This room," said he, opening the door of a little parlour, looking upon a pleasant lawn;" this room you can get your meals in.
** It's rather early i' th season for much company; an' there's choice for ye.
But ye'll find everything convenient; an' our folks will see that your table's not stinted, I'll a-warnd.
** An' then, look here," said he, leading me down two steps into a larger, and loftier room," this is our best room.
You see t' windows are level wi' t' lawn."
Here, he pushed one of the windows up, and.
after looking out silently for a minute, he went on," Eh, but this is a beautiful evening!
* This house stands high, ye see.
It can be seen fra Sedbergh one way, an' fra Fleetwood t' other.
We hev a good piece o' this land yet, towards t' shore.
Ill shew yo tomorrow.
** When I bowt it, it was all rocks an' thorns an' wild savins - very little else.
But we've worked it up well; - an' a tight job it was," said he, as he drew down the window.
He now gave a look round, and then began," Well, now; if ye hev any books, or papers, or anything to spread out, this is the place; an' nobody'll touch' em till ye tell' em.
It's the same room at Mr. Brotherton, t' member, always had.
He came to this house for many years together.
** I expect some Quaker friends of ours, from Kendal, in a day or two.
Theyere very fond o' books; an' ye can chat with' em.
** We shall get on you'll see.
Now, come, an' get your tea.
What, ye'll be famished!
Stop; here's this oak table.
It a great age, an' as heavy as iron.
This is the table at old Lord Derby's steward used to receive his Arnside rents on.
** These dark rings are marks made by hot glasses o' spirits standing on it when t' tenants canme o' paying."
Now a female voice in the lobby called out," Father; teas ready!""
Yes," replied he. "
Now, come your ways, an' get your tea.
There'll be plenty o' time for seeing things, an' talking about things, at after.
** My daughter," continued he, as we went into the next room," My daughter is a capital manager.
We leave her to look after these matters.
There's t' bell; an' if -"" Come, father," said the same female voice as before. "
Yes," replied he, walking slowly out.
I then heard the same voice saying to him in an undertone," Do, pray, let him alone till he's had his tea!""
Well, well, well;" answered the old man, as he went to his nook in the kitchen;" What I know, I know."
Chapter The Second.
Hey for the sands of Silverdale, Where wild waves ebb and flow; And weather-beaten fisher lads Go singing to and fro.
The sea has a strange attraction for the people of these islands.
The love of it runs in our blood.
We are sea-born and sea-bread; from famous races of ocean-rovers.
I should like to know how many English lads have run away to be sailors before they ever saw salt water.
Perhaps" Robinson Crusoe" may have had something to do with it in most cases; but independent of all that, they have an hereditary inclination to wander away to that element of witchery and wonder.
I felt something of this on my first evening in Silverdale.
When tea was over at the inn, I sat down to smoke and read by a window looking upon the lawn; but it was no use; I could n't rest until I had been down to the shore; so I put my book aside and set off.
** It was a fine evening!
The sunset was burning out grandly upon the woods and knolls of Silverdale.
When I came to the beach, it would be about the time of low water; and the shining pools and stripes left by the tide, looked like sentinels guarding the desert till the waves' return.
On this great level, the sea had retired so far that I could hardly discern the white line of the surge; but there came through the quiet air dying murmurs of that voice whose softest tones are suggestive of majesty and mystery; and even from the lonely sands there seemed to arise a faint hum of weird sea-music.
*** I hovered about the shore, charmed with this remarkable scene.
*** With the exception of Ulverstone, almost all the chief towns and villages of Morecambe Bay were in view, from Peel Castle round to Fleetwood.
Out towards Lancaster the water was full in sight, bright and smooth as a mirror, and the green shores of the Lune estuary stood clear on the water-line, like floating islands becalmed in a sea of silver.
*** Along the stony slope of the shore there lay an irregular line of rubbish, composed of shrivelled sea-weed, fragments of wood, broken pots, bottles, old torn sapless shoes, steeped and washed into a kind of frosted brown by the action of the briny sea; rags, bits of rope, and such like things, indicative of life on the ocean.
This rubbish had been thrown up by a high tide some days previous, and had lain since then, bleaching and crisping in the sun, turned over here and there by people who roam and root about the high-water line, as soon as the tide begins to turn, in the hope of finding" something rich and strange."
Upon the same slope there is a solitary cottage called," The Bath House."
I understand that this cottage has been sometimes lashed and flooded by the stormy waters.
Near to it there lies a broken mizen-mast, twenty yards long, and seven feet girth.
It has been dragged up out of the water's reach.
A few yards off that, there is a large pine log; and, on the rocks of the south, a battered red boat lies bottom upwards, waiting for its owners, now, perhaps, rolling cold upon the restless ocean's bed.
** Crossing the narrow channels, and patches of moist verdure, nearest the shore, I walk a little seaward, upon the track made by fish-carts going down to the nets.
Towards the water I see straggling figures; and here and there a lone fisherman is sauntering shoreward, with his long shadow on the sands before him.
Far away out, the smoke of a steamer trails through the air, and nearer, three or four small white sails are gliding over the water, lit by the setting sun.
*** Now, from the northward, a great herd of cattle moves slowly over the solemn waste, on their way, from Kent's bank to Wharton shore, a distance of about six miles, I think.
From head to hoof they shew distinctly between me and the setting sun, as their restless legs play quaintly onward in intermingling motions; and every whisk of their tails makes a clear though evanescent mark in the air.
The lowings of the herd, the barkings of the dogs, and the shouts of the drivers hurrying their cattle over the silent sands, sounds strangely impressive.
It brings to mind the many tales of adventure and fatal disaster connected with the ground they are treading.
Even whilst I am writing, I remember that, about a fortnight after I had seen that herd of cattle cross, three of the finest young men in Silverdale were overtaken by the tide about the same spot and drowned there, even in sight of their friends on shore As I came slowly up from the beach with my yielding senses steeped in the pensive splendour of the scene, I halted a minute to look at a pleasant dwelling, which stands on a green shelf of land, looking over the rocks, out upon the sands.
The windows were open, as if the rooms were being aired for some coming occupant.
I asked a bare-legged fisher lad, who came paddling up from the sea, whose house that was. "
It's Mester Tysoe's," said he; and then he stopped and stared, as if saying to himself," Well, now; if he wants somewhere to stop at aa can soon tell him of a place."
But his heart failed him, and he went quietly on, up the white road; and I followed very slowly, for the scene was far too sweet to be hurried by unheeded.
** In a bosky dingle, nearly opposite the house, a solitary throstle was chanting loud and clear upon a slender, lazy-swinging bough, like a blithe lad playing at rantipole, or the jolly clerk of Copmanhurst carousing in his lonely woodland cell.
Farther up, among the woods and gardens, the leaves were all a-tremble with wild music.
** The white road is irregularly bordered with dusty, half - trodden grass, strewn, here with bits of stone, and there, with a few cockle shells, thrown out from a wayside cottage.
On the right hand, a tuft of nettles and a low thorn bush are clustered close to the limestone wall of a small orchard, over which spreading boughs of thick-blossomed apple-trees hang in a rich gush, as if there was no room for any more of them inside.
On the left hand, where the grass border is broader, a few dusty daisies - those cottage children of the flower-world - peep out upon the green roadside; their simple beauty shining prettily through the smirching veil of their birthplace.
Close by the common trod, they smile away their tiny life, looking aloft with sunny eye, unenvious of the garden favourites on the other side of the wall.
The contented elves do not even seem to know that they are dusty.
They can wait till kind nature sends her next shower,*** In this grove of speary firs, the birds are twittering, and pruning their wings, upon the branches nearest the road, and almost within reach of me.
They look at the lounging traveller, out of those little wondering jewels of theirs.
One of them gushes forth a silvery rolade, and hops to the next twig, which swings up and down, as if dancing a welcome to its pretty comrade.
The bird gives another look at me out of the corner of his eye, and then carols away again in full-throttled glee, - not much afraid.
** Twilight is stealing on!
The fading day is suffused with the last glory of the sunken sun; and the commonest objects are robing in a beauty which seems to have more of heaven than earth in it.
The rude realities of noon are melting into a strange loveliness at the touch of the power, whose gauzy fringe of dreams trails on the golden skirts of the day; and all things seem to be stilling down to a noiseless thrill of adoration.
** It is the hour when forlorn wanderers, peeping in at cottage doors, hear mothers croodling soft lullabys to their drowsy babes, and feel very sad as thoughts of home and childhood steal into their hearts!
** Oh, meek hour of shadowy beauty!
what strange thoughts, what smouldering tendernesses, what pensive ecstasy thou hast power to waken!
* Twilight is stealing on!
* It is easier now to distinguish the different songs of birds which have lingered behind the rest, to sing the day out.
And those strange undersounds, which, even in the loneliest dell, seem to sleep when the sun is aloft, now grow upon the ear, and drowse the spirit with a mystic spell.
It seems as if the evening air was peopled with a choir of viewless minstrels, whose business was to take up the hymn of nature, when daylight lays his louder music by.
*** I stopped in my walk, and leaned upon a field wall, to look around me.
The kine are lowing aloud in this pasture, as if asking whether it was n't time to be called home.
In a distant farmyard a dog barks; and the song of a girl makes the listening ear of a little valley tingle with pleasure.
* Now, a wild bee goes bazooning by me, pleased with the spoil he is carrying home from the flowers of Silverdale; and, from yon brown upland, where the ploughman's loosened horses are wending slowly from the furrowed field, a clear jingle of chains comes through the still air.
** Now the wind gives a drowsy sough through the vale - like a man turning over in his sleep - and then dies away into silence again.
In the east, the crescent moon is gliding up the blue heavens to take her night-watch over the slumbering world.
The tree-tops are all still; and the birds are dropping off for the night in their green chambers.
But in this deepening stillness I hear the surgy voice of ocean growing louder on the ear; and now I see that the sands I left so lately are fast silvering over the rising tide.
The shores of Morecambe are fading away, and the round top of Arnside Knott grows dim.
And yet I will linger a little while.
** Here comes a brown-faced youth round the corner of the road, with a mash-tub in his arms.
He is taking short steps; I suppose, because the tub is heavy and perhaps a little hot.
He does n't notice me, however, but goes whistling into the stable-yard close by, and I see no more of him.
* Now a coatless mason comes along, under the trees, on the cross-road.
He has a dinner basket on his arm, and a tin can with a wire handle in his hand.
A little ruddy girl, with a doll clipt in her arms, is holding on by his shirt sleeve, and chattering to him in silvery trebles, as she now lilts a bit, now trots on by his side.
** There is a lull again for a few minutes.
** Anon, a healthy-looking lad comes capering up.
He is dressed in a blue check smock and patched fustian trousers; and he is kicking up the dust on the road, and indulging in frantic chuckles of independent glee, as if he did n't like to see everything looking so still, and was determined that quaintness should not have it all its own way.
He sees me looking at him; but he evidently does n't care a straw for that.
He has something like a clean towel under his arm; and I should n't wonder if his mother has been sending him somewhere with clothes home from the wash, and he is coming back with the money.
He looks at me critically for a moment or so, and - it is all over.
I am disposed of at once to the satisfaction of his unsophisticated mind, and away he goes again, singing and knocking his heels together in a kind of sidelong dance, utterly at variance with all known rules of human motion and he is out of sight in a minute.
I hear him struggling to make new noises, as he capers away up the road. "
There goes a king!"
thinks I.
*** There is nothing astir again for a few minutes, till a slipshod lass comes out of the door of the inn opposite, and walks across to the field-gate on this side, crying," Coop, cup, cup, cup!"
The cattle in the field leave off browsing immediately, and come all at once towards the gate.
The slipshod lass leads them out, and as they cross the road to the shippon in the inn yard, she gives the last of them a good slap.
* It is milking time!
** I left the darkening vale, and came up slowly towards my quarters.
In the little embowered shop, where the post-office is, one candle was dimly lighting the gloom; and in a great walled garden opposite, I heard the clear sounds of a piano, accompanied by some sweet voice.
There was very little astir when I got to the inn; and I had not been seated in my room five minutes before the landlord entered and said, Well; you've been down to the sands.
I heard yo come in.
If you'll be up in good time i' the morning, you'll see maybe eighty or a hundred fishing boats in the bay - like a fleet coing up to tak the place.
I could like yo to see that.
** But you'll be cold here.
Would yo like a bit o' fire?"
" No; I shall do for to-night."
Well, but; we've a good fire i' the kitchen; an' there's nobody in but our Stephen, an' Mr. Platt.
* Now Mr. Platt is a humorous man, an' varra good company.
Ye come in a bit an' sit down, as if nowt was.
Let me go first.
Do n't let on that I've said out, now!"
" All right.
I'll come."
In about ten minutes I had followed the old man into the kitchen.
He sat smoking in an arm-chair by the chimney nook; and he invited me to take a seat beside him.
On the other side of the table sat Stephen the landlord's son, a fine, tall young fellow; and by his side, there was a merry kind-faced man, long, lithe, and hearty, though something considerably past middle age.
He sat with one leg over the other, and his hands folded on his knee.
His eyes were turned to the floor; and he was thoughtfully humming some drowsy tune, heedless of all about him, till the landlord said, - " Come, Mr. Platt; wakken up!
what; yeere buzzing like a bumble-bee in a fox-glove!
This is a gentleman thats going to stop with us a few days."
Oh; how d' ye do, sir," said the old man;" how d' ye do!
Ye see, I'm a bit elevated - or, disguised.
I've been dining, as polite folk call it.
Now, if it was a poor chap, theyed say he was drucken.
But, as I'm noather poor nor rich, I reckon I'm getting on-ish - splashed a bit - or whatever ye like, that means truth taper' t off to a comfortable point.
There's o' sorts o' names for it; -' Hal Seas-over;"' Three sheets i' th wind;' Touched wi' the sun;'' Damp;'' Steeped;'' Foggy;' an sich like.
* But it's all one.
** Im drucken.
An' its all long o' being fond o' red herring, sir.
** A red herrin's as good as a unbrell for keeping a man dry.
But its an expensive kind o' food for all that.
It makes a body so bad to sleck.
Bring me another dobbin of angel-pap, missis!"
Coming, Mr.
Platt!"
" Mis Ter Platt!
Now, if there aught that I do n't like from a friend - it's that!
** I say, sir, never call me Mis Ter Platt, if yo please.
** Owd Joe the currier is my name!
They all know me here.
** Day Cent chap; an' of a good breed.
Frae Ribble side, I come, sir.
* There's a deal i' breeds, mind yo; oather o' cattle or Christians; an' its hard to tell which is which, sometimes.
* But, keep' em off kindred, an' cross' em carefully wi' good sorts, if yo want' em to prosper.
Are yo laughing at my owd hat, now!
I've one better nor this, mind."
" Nay; I was just thinking yu was quite right."
" Oh; thank you, sir.
*' T first i' the family.
Come, I like a man of discernment.
*** Ye've a rare pair o' boots on, sir.
** Now, listen to me.
If there be anything that I may venture to say, I know well, - it's the nature and treatment o' leather.
Aye; Joe the currier has n't forgotten the owd craft yet.
Now, leather loses it's nature in about two years, as a rule.
** Feel at my boots.
Theyere as kind as kid.
These are never polished.
Mind, I keep a pair or two for Sundays, as a sort o' sacrifice to daycency.
But blacking kills leather; there's vitriol in it.
I'll tell ye what's a good thing to do.
If ever ye have your boots blacked, rub' em over with a little neat's - foot oil; let it sink in; an' then wipe' em with a dry cloth.
They'll shine as well as ever.
* A, when ye come in with' em slutchy, wash the dirt off, an' wipe' em with a cloth; an' then set' em in a cool place to dry; for fire kills leather, too, mind ye.
Well; when your boots are quite dry, rub' em soundly wi' currier's dubbing.
They'll last twice as long."
" Do you work at the trade now, sir?"
No.
You see, I hev a bit o' property; an' I've come to spend my days w' owd Buckstick, i' th corner, an' these good-tempered bowster-yeds i' Silverdale.
But, you must come an' hev your tea wi' me.
Will ye, sir?
* Mind, I'm a man o' my word.
* Ye shall hev cockles, an' flooks, an' beef-steaks - an' a bacon-collop as big as a barrel-stave.
* As for drink - ye shall pick for yoursel'; an' what I have n't I'll get.
I've a few books too.
Shakespeare!
- ' Now is the winter of our discontent, Made glorious summer by the sins of York; And all the clouds' - I'' tell you what it is, sir.
If I had takken pains wi' mysel', I might ha' been a shining character.
But I was fond o' company, an' would see the world.
Now, it's far on i' the afternoon wi' me; it'll be dark soon; - an' the' world will see no more of owd Tom.
* Eh, my!
*** Will ye believe it, sir?
I was once a Sunday school teacher at a cock-pit!
* True; by Jupiter!
** But it was all for wild fun, ye know; beside, I was young an' foolish then."
" Youere getting wiser now, Mr. Platt;" sad the landlord's son. "
I'm as wise as thee, hooiver, Tulip nose!"
said the old man, starting to his feet;" an' considering my age, I'm as straight an' firm as a gavelock.
Look here!
** Attention!
Eyes right!
**( Lend me your stick sir, if you please.
* Thankyou!
)** Shoulder arms!
** Eh, stivven; owd lad.
For two pins awed run tho straight through!
** Here's you stick, sir.)
God bless your lives, I would n't hurt a fly!
( Sings.)
Didder Um, didder-um, didder-um-dum-dum.
Stephen; thou knows I'm strong.
Owd Joe, the currier!
** Come, I'll give you a song: - " I am a friar of orders gray, -" ( enter the landlady.)
" Eh, Mr. Platt.
You make such a noise.
Do not sing so loud.
It's getting late; an' we've some strangers just come in.
Bridle a little bid, I pray yo."
Noise!
Do you call that a noise, owd lady?
Why, ye've no soul for music!
Come, never mind, I'll tell ye a tale.
Mun I?"
" Aye, aye;" said the landlord, laughing;" tell us a tale."
Very well; I will.
But, ye know, now, that if I do n't sing it, I shall stut like a - locomotive engine.
Ied better sing it. '
It's of an owd farmer mending his plough; Tooral looral, right fol laddady; It's of an owd farmer -' ( Re Enter landlady.)
" Now, Mr. Platt.
Do, do be said."
" Well, come; lets drop it* I'm a gentleman, every inch, Bin i' France.
I hev sir.
Worked i' Paris.
Owd Joe, the currier!
** When I was i' Paris, I gate drucken wi' red ink.
** Here's your health sir!
( Sings again.)
Around the brow of blue-eye Sue, The auburn ringlets curl; -' " Nay, nay," said the landlord," do oblige us for once.
Ye know how your voice sounds through this house."
Oblige ye!
I am obliging ye!
Ye might hev a funeral, or summat, i' the hole.
It's warse nor being i' the stocks.
One could sing there.
If I owe ye ought, I can pay."
" We know that.
But ye hear what the missis says; an' I know she's not i' good health just now. "
Then, I'll have a bit o' smother' t fun to mysel'.
( Croons in a low tne.)
Didder Um, didder-um, didder-um-dum-dum!"
" Ye'll nivver mend," said the landlord, laughing. "
Mend!
Can you paint the lily, owd Buckstick, or gild refined gold?
** Talking about that, I was i' Ulversotne t' other day, an' there was a lot o' chaps actilly whitewashing t' sun."
" Whitewashing the sun," cried Stephen. "
Aye!
I mean the' Sun Inn,' yo barn owl!
** I met' Mop Geordie,' too, at t' same time, an' I hardly knowed him.
The owd lad was disguised in a clean shirt.
** But, never mind sich things.
** Thou sees how I'm snubbed wi' folk, Stephen.
Thou'll never turn thi back of owd Joe wi' to, lad?"
" No, never."
" That's reight!
Gi' me thi' hand!
** Eh, I am a foolish man.
** Bring me another dobbin.
Sorrow will have ale, an' I'm of a melancholy breed.
*** Stivven, lad; they say thouert gooing to get wed. ( Sings.)
' He walked behind, and hung his head, To hide a twinkling eye; And, when they laid her down i' the ground, He made a shift to cry.'
Now, I'm not quite so hard-hearted as that.
I believe I should cry if the devil hissel' was buried.
Besides, it's mournful to think what a lot o' parsons thereed be on the tramp if such a thing was to happen.
I say, sir; ye shall hev a sail i' my boat.
I've a pleasure boat o' my own.
Stephen; thou hears me!
He shall hev a sail.
Owd Joe keeps his word - drunk or sober.
But there's a lot o' ye chaps that'll say more in a minute than ye'll stand to in a month."
Here he slowly dropped his chin, as if done up; and, in a few minutes, he fell asleep, muttering something about" a bad cold," and having a stocking lapped round his throat when he went to bed.
Quite tired to-night," said the landlord. "
A little sleep'll do him good.
He's a favourite with us in Silverdale.
He's so straight-forward - an' a very feeling man too.
Now, if any poor body comes to trouble, he's one of the first to put down his sovereign for' em - an' does it freely, an' all.
When he's sober, now, he's very little to say; but there's plenty o' dry fun in him, even then.
You should have heard one day when there was a man here fra Sedbergh way, telling an impossible tale about a dog that could go i' th night-time, an' pick marked sheep out o' the flock, an' drive' em fifteen mile, to meet the maister at market, i' the morning.
Well, Mr. Platt though he was drawing the long-bow a bit, an' he was determined he should n't have it all his own way; so he said that he knew of a dog upo' Bleasdale fells, that did the very same thing, an', beside that, it actilly sowd the sheep at a fair market price, an' then brought the money home in it mouth.
* Well, ye know, the man stared; for that was a clipper.
The owd lad there never let on; but smoked away, as solemn as coffin-plate; - an' they both waited a bit.
At last, this man thought heed try another tack; so he began about a duck of his that hed swallowed a snig, within an inch of a yard long, an' I forget how far round, but it was a terrible deal.
Then, the owd lad at him again, an' said that a friend of his hed a duck that once swallowed a snig about an inch an' three - quarters longer than that, an' rather more i' girth; but, the snig ran straight through, an' then turned round an' swallowed the duck.
Well, ye know; there was a pill!
That licked t' other into fits.
The man said that he did n't believe it.
But he saw that he was a dead bet; so he gav in, an' held his tongue.
** Oh; he can romance hard enough when he likes, for fun; but, nothin.
vexes him worse that telling down-reet lies."
We sat silent a few minutes, and then the landlord said," Theyere going to let us alone to-night, I think.
We shall get to bed soon; an' I'll have a look round with yo i' the morning, if ye like."
I said I should be very glad; and then, we lapsed into silence again.
In three or four minutes more, voices were heard outside, and the door opened by a hardy old man, who came in laughing, followed by others.
The noise awoke our sleeping friend, and he rose up, rubbing his eyes, and said, - " Hello!
who comes?
** How now; ye black and midnight; - Eh; its Jossy Trotter, bigow!
* an' lile Robin, t' mason!
* I say, Robin, - Robin - hesto brought thi fiddle?"
" No; I hevn't."
" Well, then, go an' fotch it, yo tweedling divvle; an' let's have a practice-neet!
Thae knows' The Hen Silver' comes off next week; an' there'll be owd songs to sing, an' owd capers to cut, an' sich like.
What, we mun be ready mon!"
Nay; aa'll nut ventur!
Iv aa go for it to-neet, aa shaen't git oot ageen."
" Aye, aye.
Is it so?
I see.
Well; sit tho down.
** What, Squire!
Thee, too!
* Tol De-dol!
Gi' mo thi hand, owd dog!
The best fisherman i' Silverdale!
Am I right Stephen?"
" Yes, I believe it is so."
" Well; why did n't yo say so at first, then, yo leather-yed!
** Come, lads; owd Tom stans this whet.
What'll ye have?
I say, sir, there are friends o' mine; good friends, every one.
Is n't it so, Squire?"
" It is, Mr. Platt.
Ye've no enemies at I knaw on - except drink."
" Drink!
Enemy!
* Well; an' does n't t' parson tell us to love our enemies, owd Tulip Nose!
* Read, mark, learn, an' - go to sarvice; yo moralizing foo.
** I'll tell tho what it is, Squire.
Good drink never were an enemy to a wise mon.
** Thou may have a like aim fro that, what a rare thing a wise mon is i' this world.
I'll not say for thee an' me, thou knows, Squire; because folk very seldom are as big foos as other folk, till theyere fairly tried; an' they are not then sometimes.
But there's a saying that monkeys, madmen, and childer are not fit to play wi' razors.
Beside, thou remembers the owd song, - Good government is all."
Come, that's enough!
I do n't like perchin in a ale-house.
Let's be jolly!"
" Aye; let's be jolly!
Ye'll ha' me crying directly.
Tak this cheer."
Well; hutch up lower.
Now then.
How arto getting on lad?"
" Oh; hard up;" said the fisherman. "
Hard up; like a snail at the end ov his shell."
" Thee hard up, Squire!"
replied old Tom, laying his hand on the fisherman's shoulder. "
I'll lend tho then pound!
Thouert a good sort!
I'll lend tho ten pound, Squire!"
" Thank ye, Mister Platt," said the fisherman. "
Hae ye t' brass o' ye?"
" No, lad; I have n't it, - not here.
Thou thinks I'm drucken.
But I'll say the same thing to-morn.
I'll lend it tho when I draw my rents."
" I knaw varra weel, yeed du it.
But, then, I may happen have a good draw or two mysel' afore then.
Never mind; yaar good will's naa worse.
Aa'm varra mch obliged to ye.
** Come; aa'll gi' ye a toast: - ' Curious folk hev curious wishes; Success to men, an' death to fishes.'"
" Come," said Jossy Trotter," aa'll give anudder: Here's health to the living, and' peace to the dead, An' wishing poor men may never want bread.'"
" There's a varra good feeling, now, about that yan;" said Squire. "
Joshua; strike up a bit ov a ditty.
Do n't let's dee i' t shell."
" I' se nut in singing tune," replied Jossy. "
My heead aches."
" Niver mind," answered Squire. "
We shall awlus ache somwheers, as lang as weere living, mun.
Strike up" T' Miller."
" Now," said the landlord," sing low, and shut that door."
At length Jossy laid down his pipe, and cleared his throat; and after breaking down three times, he closed his eyes, and sang in a quaint drawling voice, an old ballad, called" The Miller and his Three Sons."
It is given in some collections of the ancient songs of the English peasantry, but I never heard it sung before.
When Jossy had finished, he called upon a young man in the corner, who struck up the following: - " Here's to the sands of Silverdale, Where wild waves ebb and flow; And weather-beaten fisher lads Go singing to and fro. "'
Tis first upon that pleasant shore The primrose meets with spring,' Tis there the lark first tunes with his throat, And tries his little wing. "
I fain would spend a quiet life Beside some grassy lea; And, when my days are done, lie down To slumber by the sea; " Where changeful ocean's murmuring waves Come singing to the strand; A world of wonder in the deep - A paradise on land.
"When this was over, they gradually fell into talk about foot-racing, for which the Silverdale lads are famous.
The old currier was asleep again; and.
being tired myself, I slipped off to bed.
Chapter The Third.
Hey for the lads of Silverdale!
The fleetest men that go; They'll run a mile to serve a friend, But never flinch from foe.
Next morning, I was wakened by someone tapping at my chamber door.
I turned over lazily, and called out" Yes."
" Half Past six," said a voice outside. "
Thankyou," replied I;" all right."
As the wakener's footsteps died away downstairs, I was reminded of that curious Lancaster character, the" Knocker Up."
" What a strange life his must be," thinks I, as I pulled the blankets up to my chin, and glided off into a drowsy deliberation about the necessity for rising so soon.
I knew this was a dangerous question to meddle with just then, but it was so.
The morning looked fine certainly, so far as I could see it out of bed; but then, would n't it be quite as fine, perhaps finer, in another hour or so.
Besides, was n't I tired with my long ride of yesterday afternoon, and did n't I sit up late, and had n't I a bad cold, which might turn to bronchitis, or something, if not carefully nursed in due time.
** It was a strong case.
I drew the blankets closer about me.
** As for the fleet of fishing boats - they could be seen just as well as any other morning, I sup - posed.
And then, was n't it a very good thing to lie waken half an hour or so in a morning, simmering one's thoughts over - marshalling the forces of the mind, before going into the battle of human action, to be defeated, alas!
how often.
Of course, it was; and, by Jove, thinks I, I've a good mind to lie in bed till ten o'clock, just to get the ache out of my bones.
** But, how about the landlord?
I told him that I would be up soon, to see the boats.
Well, what of that?
Could n't I look at them through the window, and then turn in again?
Capital conclusion!
I bounced out, and pulled up the blind.
The morning was glorious.
The boats were there upon the sunlit bay.
The view of land and sea was so new and fine, that I was fairly roused; so I dressed myself and went down stairs.
It was too soon for breakfast.
The landlord was in the fields somewhere.
I wandered about in my slippers a few minutes; and, delightful as everything was, I must confess, that just then I missed the morning cry of the newspaper lad, with his" penny daily."
But I went out into the green enclosure in front of the house - a pleasant little seclusion - for Silverdale is more or less quiet everywhere.
This enclosure is made up of a grove, a plot of kitchen garden, and, between the two, a little flower-bordered lawn, commanding as fine a view to seaward as can be had anywhere in the dale.
A small green gate, half hidden by rose trees, and half overhung by a laburnum tree - if I remember right - open from the lawn upon sloping fields, which divide the house from the sands.
From this gate, a bye-path leads to a picturesque wooded nook of the shore, called" Cove."
It is one of the quietest and prettiest short walks in Silverdale. "
Cove" is said to be haunted by a troubled spirit - a boggart or" dobbie," as they call it there.
The rocks about" Cove" are picturesque in form and colour; and there are caves from whence, Silverdale people ill tell you, fairies come forth on moonlight nights to dance upon the sands.
It is a pleasant spot; and you may come back from it by the shore, or wander thence, on a good road, up the whole length of the vale: or, at a short distance up that road, strike off at the left hand over Middlebarrow, and so down to see Arnside vale and its ancient tower.
But on the lovely morning when I first went over the fields to" Cove," I came back by the sands, and went up through the village, a distance of about a mile and a half.
I went the whole day in my slippers too, and the reader may partly guess how quiet that country is, when I tell him I did not meet half a dozen people in may walk.
** That morning the scene wore quite a different beauty to what I had gazed on with so much delight the evening before.
** The maiden sisters were bustling about their little embowered shop, where the post-office is, and I came up the road homeward, crooning that cheerful English song: - In the down-hill of life when I find I'm declining, May my lot no less fortunate be, Than a snug elbow-chair can afford for reclining, And a cot that overlooks the wide sea.
There is something very healthy about that old ditty.
It would do anybody's heart good, either to sing it or to hear it sung.
I think the last verse very fine: - And when I, at last, must throw off this frail covering, Which I've worn for three - score years and ten, On the brink of the grave I'll not seek to keep hovering, Nor my thread wish to spin over again; But my face in the glass I'll serenely survey, And counting each wrinkle and furrow, Hope this poor worn-out stuff, which is threadbare to-day, May become everlasting tomorrow.
When I got to the inn, I entered by the kitchen door, and sat down by the fire a few minutes.
From the window I could see all that came on the road, which goes by the end of the house.
The landlady was in the back garden, opposite the open door; and I heard her call out to a ruddy old farmer on the road," Good morning, Mr. Middleton.
What, youere sound and well, I see.
I saw the cart upset; and I says' Eh!
Mr. Middleton's killed.'
But I'm very glad youere no worse."
" Well, so I am, too," replied he. "
Ye see, this is how it was.
I was stanning up driving, ye know, when t' kek-rod slipt oot, an' up went t' cart, like shot; bud, somehoo or anudder, aa slidder' t doon o' my feet as nice as the day.
I could n't ha' thowt Ied bin sea nimmble.
Nivver ye ca' me an aad man again.
What, a cat could n't ha' dune it better."
" Eh, but ye might ha' hurt yoursel' badly."
" Aye, aye, I knaw that.
I was varra lucky; an' its quite as well as it is.
without any braggan.
** Bud I' se off to Kendal.
Hoo's Stivven?"
" He's all right, thank you."
" Well; good morning."
" Good morning."
A large spying-glass lay upon the table in my room, and after breakfast I took it out with me to the elevated seat on the lawn, where I sat down to look about and spy out certain spots on distant shores of the bay.
I had been there about an hour when the landlord came to say that his son was setting of with the cart for water to the" Dripping Well," in Leven's Bottom, and when he came back he would go with me to the lake on Silverdale Moss.
** Now, a country well is always an interesting sight, so I bethought me that I would go down with the cart for water.
I found Stephen in the inn yard yoking old" Betsy" to the cart, in which were two great tubs.
In a few minutes we passed the little post-office, and leaving the sea on the right, we went a short distance along the road which leads southward up to Lindeth Tower.
We then turned off on the left up a rocky bye-road, and then down into a lonely holme, in the lowest part of which the bye-way brought us to the" Dripping Well."
It is an ancient well, situate at the foot of a long breast of picturesque limestone rock, which runs out southward towards the sands.
This breast of rock is itself a beautiful sight, and its beauty is enhanced by a scattered overgrowth, consisting of patches of grass, savins, brambles, thorns, hazels, wild plum trees, stunted yews, ferns, wild tansy, blue bells, primroses, and daisies.
The grassy hollow near the well is a great place for wood-cocks, as Stephen said," because of the springs."
The well is a long, narrow trough of joined stones, sunken in a shady place at the foot of the rocks.
It is fed by little rills and drippings from the hill side, hence its name" The Dripping Well."
The lower part of the rocks, just over the well, is richly cushioned and freaked with moss.
In one pretty crevice, where the moss is of a lighter, brighter green than elsewhere, a large fresh leaf of ivy had been doubled and placed so as to form a green spout, over which the prettiest rindle of water came trickling into daylight, and then falling into the limpid well below, played a tiny melody - so delicate that one had to bend down to hear it well - such melody as makes the" little folk" who love the moonlight itch to fall a-dancing.
The old well is rudely enclosed on the outer side by low limestone walls, with a small opening left in the centre through which water fetchers go in and out, resting their vessels on the mossy walls.
The inside of the narrow enclosure is paved with blue boulders, worn with long footing, and at one end it is shaded by thorns and wild rose trees, beneath which a bush of green nettles clusters, and a few sprigs of delicate fern peep out from a most nook thereabouts.
** Stephen filled his big tubs and we started homeward.
One tub had a wooden lid on, the other was only covered with a rough cloth to keep in the water; but, in spite of this, it flung over in great splashes as the cart jolted up to Lindeth tower, the tree shadows lay sharp-cut upon the sunny road.
Here, three fat ducks waddled across lazily from one green border to the other, quacking; there, a white calf has pushed his innocent face through the bars of a gate, and was bleating forth his young troubles to the heedless world; and, right before us, came slowly up a dusty old sand-cart, drawn by a dusty little blind horse, and driven by a dusty lad.
The lazy sand-cart went noiselessly by, like a man walking in his stocking-feet.
There was now no human being in sight till we came to where three roads met, and the garden walls of a mansion were overhung with blossom.
There was a sound of children's voices in the garden; and, as we went by, a bevy of young beauties sallied forth for a walk, accompanied by a frisking, noisy, short-legged terrier, whose two eyes shone through their little night of gray hair, like glow-worms in the dark upon a bushy hedge-bank burning.
* When we got to the inn it was drawing near to noon, and, whilst Stephen got the water-tubs out of the cart, and stabled" Betsy," I sat down to talk with Old Joe, the postman from Lancaster, who calls there to rest and get his dinner before returning home again.
He was telling about going with letters to the mansion of some old gentleman who was deaf.
The gentleman was walking about the lawn when, seeing Joe come up, all travel-soiled and strange, he called out," Who are you?"
" Postman, sir!""
Be off, you vagabond; we've nothing for you!""
Postman, sir!"
cried Joe, still speeding on. "
Be off, I tell you!
What d' ye want?"
" Postman sir!""
Do n't come near me, you rascal!"
continued the deaf old gentleman;" leave the grounds immediately, or I'll set the dogs on you!""
Postman, sir!"
said Joe, once more, pulling out the letters and handing them to the irascible gentleman; who, seeing his mistake, said," O dear, yes, yes!
I was quite wrong.
What, you'll not think anything about it.
I'm an old man, and very deaf, and - here, here, here; you was doing your duty.
Right, right; very right.
"** In a few minutes Stephen came in from the stable, and we prepared for our walk to the lake.
The tarns of Silverdale are known there by the names of Great and Little Hawes Water.
They are joined by a very small channel.
The lesser is a gloomy-looking pond, surrounded by a tall, thick hedge of thorns, hollies, and wild rose-trees, with a great growth of brambles.
The ground immediately about it is swampy.
I remember how I had to wade to reach the hedge; and then how I scratched my hands a little, and tore my coat a good deal in trying to get a peep at the stirless witch-pool.
The larger tarn is something more than a mile around, and is quite open to view.
I had often heard of this tarn before, on account of some peculiarities belonging thereto.
The nearest end of that water is about a mile and a half from the inn.
It is situate in a lone nook at the eastern extremity of the vale, and at the head of a level tract of land, newly won from the waste, called" Silverdale Moss."
It lies between the hills of Middlebarrow; and, except one little shooting-box upon its northern shore, and an old farm-house on the same side, I believe it is out of sight of any dwelling of man.
Its waters are of great depth, and it abounds in pike.
It is said to be strangely moved by the tides of the sea.
Near its eastern shore there are traces of a Roman road; and I am told that such traces are clearer upon the hill called Trowbarrow, hard by on the south.
A short distance from the water's edge there is good bye-road nearly all round, but whoever walks close upon its sedgy marge must mind his footing well, or he may sink farther than he likes into a kind of limy paste on one side of the tarn, and on the other into the peaty bog.
On its southern-eastern shore there is a bed of beautiful little snow-white shells, as delicate as frozen moonlight.
There is a tradition, too, about the big snig of Silverdale tarn.
The lake is said to have been haunted by a great eel, or snake or some kind.
Near the old farm-house, upon the upland, north of the water, a curious rock stands alone on the summit of a pastoral knoll.
The rock is called the" Buck Stone."
Seen from the road it bears some rude like - ness to an immense human head, and at a lower part is worn away in a smooth neck-like hollow.
Tradition says that the great eel of Silverdale tarn used to come up from the water, and coil itself round this lower part of the rock, thus wearing away the hollow place in the stone.
Here, coiled round, it used to lurk until some careless sheep came within reach, when it would dart forth, and drag its victim down to the water, to devour it there.
Thus runs the story in its simplest form, though I have heard different versions of it.
I have heard different accounts of the size of this eel, too; but there was a certain old Silverdale wag, called Thomas Hoggatt, who used to say that when it was killed at last, there was nearly a pack of wool found in the hollow of one of its teeth.
Of course, that's a lie; but there are folk in Silverdale who would have believed it if it had been ten times as big.
It was high noon when we set out for Silverdale Tarn.
The sun glared upon the white road in a way that was painful to the eye.
High up on the steep of Middlebarrow, and right in front of us, a large new mansion stands on a bold perch, among sloping gardens, with a park stretching away east, along the hill side.
Our way lies by the lower edge of that park.
There are not more than half a dozen houses on the road.
First we pass the blacksmith's.
The smith door is open, but he must be gone to dinner, for all is still.
A little further on the other side of the road, we come to the cottage of old Halliday, the shoemaker, better known as" Aald Sabbath," and said to be the best workman in Silverdale for strong work.
He sits working and singing, with the door open, in a little white shed adjoining his cottage.
The mild-faced young man on the bench next to him is his son, the fleetest footracer in all Silverdale.
From the road, in front of" Aald Sabbth's" shop, a charming cluster of white cottages may be seen, nestling in a green corner, at the foot of Middlebarrow.
The road winds around eastward, and, in ten minutes more we come to the modest chapel of Silverdale, with its little school-house, at the edge of the parl.
After that we pass a doleful-looking house, which I should have thought deserted but for seeing a child at play near the door.
Half a mile further on, the road gives a sharp turn, as we come to two old-fashioned cottages, of very rude build.
I think they must have been white-washed some time, but that is doubtful.
Opposite these cottages, old Jonathan Jackson is leaning over his pig-cote wall, watching a young litter at their meat.
At the bottom of the slope, just beyond this, we enter the level tract called Silverdale Moss, and leave the homes of man behind.
As we went along the rough cart road, my companion said," Now, look out for vipers.
Such weather as this they come out of the woods, and lie coiled up, basking in the sun, on places like that," pointing to a bank of parched grass by the road side.
We looked about as we went on.
In a few minutes there was a low rustle in a bush close to the left hand wall.
My companion turned quickly, and called out," That's one, I believe!"
I began to beat the bush with my stick; but, he said," Nay, it'll have got away into the wall, now.
Come on; we shall have a chance of seeing one in Middlebarrow Wood.
It's a liklier place than this."
We went on; but I could n't help looking cautiously about, for I did n't like the idea of setting my foot on a sleeping viper.
The day was hot as if it had been midsummer, and the glaring limestone road so pained my sight, that I was glad when my companion turned aside into a wheat field belonging to his father.
Here, in the shade of the hedge, we sat down upon a harrow, to smoke and look about us.
It was the time" when wheat is green, and hawthorn buds appear," and the field we sat in reminded me of one of Lynell's pictures.
The dark brown soil, all bespeared with new sprung wheat, was beautiful and relieving to the eye.
The rippling tarn was all in view, and from its blue waters a refreshing coolness came now and then, as the lazy wind stole by, stirring the willows and hawthorn leaves about us with a sleepy rustle.
On the opposite side, green pastures swelled gracefully up to where an old farm-house stood, half shaded by trees.
From the woods of Trowbarrow, behind us, the cuckoo's note floated loud and clear over the moss.
Upon the furrowed field, the wailing, white-breasted plover, and the trilling" whincheck" sang and wandered.
Up among the trees, on the nearest hill side, the throstle gushed forth in luscious fits his jovial lay; whilst, poised aloft on sunlit wing, the lark rained down his lyric shower upon the golden air.
This moss is a famous place for wild birds.
We could not tell the names of the birds we saw and heard that day.
The scene brought to mind Burns' song: - " The partridge loves the fruitful fells, The plover loves the mountains; The woodcock haunts the lonely dells, The soaring heron the fountains; Through lofty groves the cushat roves, The paths of man to shun it; The hazel bush overhangs the thrush, The spreading thorn the linnet. "
Thus every kind their pleasure find, The savage and the tender; Some social join and leagues combine; Some solitary wander; Avaunt, away!
the cruel away, Tyrannic man's dominion; The sportsman's joy, the murdering cry, The fluttering gory pinion.
"From the upland pastures on the other side of the moss came the low of kine, and the bleating of lambs; and, in the old farm-yard above, the shrill clarion of chanticleer was sometimes heard.
* It was whilst sitting here, in the noontide splendour of nature, that I learnt the legend of Silverdale tarn.
* We had brought a basket for some of the curious little shells which lie in beds upon some parts of the south-eastern shore of the tarn.
They may be gathered in handfulls; but it is better to scoop them up with a spoon, they are so fragile.
We took a shortcut over the furrows to the water side.
Here, the footing was so soft and uncertain, that we had to pick our way carefully, turning back, and going round about, to get to where the shells lay like patches of snow upon the bank beyond.
A few minutes sufficed to fill our basket with the shells.
There was a solitary pike fisher on the opposite side of the water; and as we pricked along the soft bank to get to the eastern shore, a silvery laugh came from the road upon the side of the northward hill, where two young ladies had been watching our awkward motions as we sank into the limy paste, first with one foot and then the other.
The line of the Roman road lies along the eastern end of the tarn.
This is the extreme nook of the vale.
The limestone rocks looked very beautiful amongst the surrounding green.
There was a great growth of wild flowers, chiefly pansies, bluebells and primroses.
We wandered in this wild nook nearly two hours.
Rabbits were running about everywhere; and we saw several squirrels in the trees.
The woods of Silverdale abound in nuts; and the reader may find in Peel Park museum in Salford, a curious pair of primitive nut-crackers, known as Silverdale nut-crackers.
They were given to that museum by the late Mr. Brotherton, M.P., who was very fond of Silverdale.
I brought two pairs of them away with me.
* We returned on a better road, along the wooded side of Middlebarrow.
This was a pleasant diversion of the walk, and from this elevation we could see the configuration of the vale better than before.
The road brought us out upon the sands, at the rocky corner called" Cove," from whence we came homeward by the shore, and up through the village.
As we came along the sands there came, now and then, a sound like the boom of a distant cannon.
I asked what the sound meant, and my companion said," They were blasting rock on Meathorp Fell."
The tide was gliding gracefully up again into the creases and fantastic indentations of the thirsty sands; and the evening train was trailing its snow-plume in the wind along the shore of Cartmel.
* When we got to the inn, the old currier was there again - clothed in his right mind.
The old man was now very shy, and had very little to say for some time, except that he hoped he had not said nor done anything offensive to anybody the night before.
After we had reassured him a little, he became more talkative, and I learnt many interesting things from him relative to old Silverdale customs, such as" Sand Leadings," Boon Ploughs," and" Hen Silvers."
The landlord's son told me of a cave called" Harry Hest's Hole," on Wharton Crag, connected, by tradition, with the first scotch rebellion.
Later in the evening an old gardener, called" Strawberry John," came in, and entertained us with stories of the" dobbies" of Silverdale shore, -" Scout Dobbie,"" Cove Dobbie," and" The Sand Dobbie."
Scout dobbie is a headless woman, who haunts Jacks' Scout and the cave below that, called" Cow Mouth," in a rocky corner of the shore, south of Lindeth tower. "
You see, sir," said the humorous old currier;" these dobbies have each their own beat marked out, like so many policemen."
" Strawberry John," however, evi - dently believed in many of the wild tales he told about these things; but the old currier said that, for his own part, he thought the weather last back-end had been very hard for dobbies, and he was afraid that some of them had not got over it.
** After this, I spent several days very pleasantly in Silverdale; and I do not care how soon I see the place again.
Note A.
Page 100.
The Plague In Dalton The following curious document made its appearance in the columns of the Ulverstone Advertiser, in June, 1861.
The talented editor of that journal introduces it with these words, -" As the production of an eye-witness of what he describes, the effusion is valuable in a historical point of view.
The' Lugubrious Lines,' descriptive of the ravages of the plague of 1631, in Dalton, were originally written in Latin verse, by George Postlethwaite, parish clerk, and master of the Free School of Dalton.
They were afterwards translated into English prose, probably by himself; and the narrative now appears in the modern orthography.
From the' Register of Baptisms, Weddings, and Burials,' belonging to the parish church of Dalton, we make the following extract, by way of prelude: -' In this moneth of July, 1631, did the plague begin in Dalton and Bigger.
There died in Dalton of this sickness three hundred and three score( 360), and in Waney( Walney) one hundred and twenty.
It ceased about Easter followinge.'
George Postlethwaite, the erudite scribe, seems to have shared in the popular superstitions of his neighbours of 230 years ago, in attributing the plague to the malice and wicked propensities of a man of the name of Lancaster, who brought the pestilence neatly folded up in a parcel of ribbons.
Here is a narrative, the inflated style of which, together with its quaintness, and the interest attaching to the subject on which it treats, must secure for it the attention of many local readers.
Lugubrious Lines.
On The Destructive And Violent Plague, Which Raged In Dalton, And Spread With Rapid Fury In The Seventh Year Of The Reign Of King Charles The First, And The Year Of Our Lord 1631.
By George Postlethwaite, Parish Clerk, and Master of the Free School of Dalton.
( Translated from the Latin).
Immersed in Lamentations, in deep groans and severe grief, I ardently wish to compose a few lines, but the sorrow of my breast impedes the undertaking.
Tears to me are torments which impair the energy of the mind; yet while a heavy torpor possesses my limbs, abundant streams flow from my weeping eyes, I stand as if affrighted by demons or monsters in the night.
When I attempt to speak, my voice is suddenly obstructed; when I attempt to write, a paralysis restrains all the powers of my hand.
Though all parts of my body are thus enfeebled with grief, yet will I write a few lines suggested by my sorrowful brain.
Ye cheering train of muses inspire these my undertakings; mingle cultivated measures of poetry in my mind; sprinkle my uninstructed forehead with the sacred forehead with the sacred waters of Helicon; and shine upon me with a benign aspect.
And you, Melpomene, who delight in tragic strains, now hasten unto me, for not only will you be an acceptable companion in my affliction, but your assistance, O hallowed muse, I crave, to sing the sudden ruin of a small ancient town.
Meanwhile you may repose with me under the expanded covert of a cool shade, and place your snow-white feet upon the tender grass, for now Phoebus has ascended above the tops of the mountains, and heat glows in his piercing rays.
Virgil sung the untimely funerals of miserable Troy over the ashes of potent Priam and his ruined kingdom; and Ovid, the adept of love, described the depravity of the human race, while yet the world was new; but I intend to recite the death of many men who fell not by the bloody arms of thundering Mars.
I propose to relate the ruin of a small town, the houses of which devouring fire did not consume, nor the waters of the expanded ocean overwhelm its walls, but which, alas!
a severe plague destroyed.
There is at a small distance from the sea, and contiguous to the streams of a rivulet, a town called Dalton, which annually afforded sustenance to many poor people, to orphans, to children blind, and to those who were miserably lame.
Here various artificers, namely, weavers, smiths, tailors, carpenters, shoemakers, tanners, and respectable tradesmen, together with their assistants, obtained their livelihood and apparel.
There also lived millers, maltsters, glovers, vendors of ale and wine, mantuamakers, butchers, wool-spinners, many herdsmen and husbandmen, together with people of other occupations, too tedious to notice.
In the principal part of the town, the church is situated near a small castle, upon an elevated rock of hard flint, from whence the bells dispense a clear sound to a remote distance.
Six hundred and twelve inhabitants, of different ages, attended the church, when the divine pastor, who was the guardian of his Christian people, diligently taught the Word of God.
It contains flint.
But now confide in what I say; the subject is not of small importance, therefore listen attentively to my artless strains.
And although I, unhappy person, could not describe the sorrowful events of the time which grievously afflict my heart, were my powers of speech increased two hundred fold; yet, nevertheless, I will begin.
I mean not to desist from my proposal.
In this town, sorrow with tears, lamentations and deep sighs began with the dire funerals of many of the inhabitants.
A miserable, accursed, abandoned, vile fugitive, named Lancaster, with his wife, came down from the superb city of London, bearing his own bottles of death, and enclosed amongst garments and precious jewels, which were laid up, as common report said, and the event verified, upon the death of the people, to destroy many of the living.
These two person brought in their baggage deadly poisons - a Tartarean plague - the sharp darts of cruel death.
They were inhuman visitants to the neighbours, enemies and malignant lodgers to their entertainers.
O, Jupiter, I wish that you, with dire thunder, had sent those noxious serpents to the rapid streams of Phlegethon, when first they approached our walls.
When I consult the learned volumes of the poets, I find that the deceitful Grecians once sent a wooden horse into Troy, replete with brave soldiers; that upon its arrival," some of the citizens wondered at the stupendous size of the horse, and the venerable Tymoeites first advised it might be dragged with the walls and lodged within the town; but Capys and all whose sentiments were the result of sounder judgment, strenuously urged either to throw this insiduous engine of the Greeks and their suspected oblation into the sea; or, by applying flames to consume it to ashes; or, at least, to lay open and ransack the recesses of the hollow womb.
Meanwhile, the fickle populace were divided into opposite inclinations, upon which, Laocoon, burning with indignation, hastened down from the top of the citadel, and while afar off, exclaimed, O wretched countrymen, what desperate infatuation possesses you?
Do you believe the enemy gone: or think you any gifts from the Greeks can be free from deceit?
Is it thus you are acquainted with Ulysses?
Either the Greeks lie concealed within this wood, or it is an engine framed against our walls.
Yet all prepared immediately to scale the walls, the fatal engine which afterwards brought dire funerals to the miserable Trojans, and ruin to the city, mounted the battlements filled with armed men, and the glory of Troy was suddenly destroyed.
Virgil, AEn., Liber.
Ii.
In like manner, believe me, after the aforesaid vulture came to our town with his partner of the evil and their vile luggage, Arthur Richardson, being much impressed with trembling fear, said to many people we shall be infected immediately with a violent plague, and I will forfeit my life upon the cross if this fiery pestilence rage not many months amongst us, as we have seen before.
But yet notwithstanding this precaution we, miserable people gave a kind reception to those crude enemies, who were placed in the principle part of the town.
Presently the great power of the secret infection, included in the garments, burst out in a furious plague, the contagious fire of which blazed through the whole town, and consumed the mortal curbs.
And as the pruner of trees gives many wounds to the boughs with his hard axe, and leaves the naked trunk, so, alas!
did the stranger Lancaster give severe wounds to us, then commenced physician, and administered poison.
Thus was the once cheerful town of Dalton oppressed with a grievous pestilence, and many inhabitants were its victims.
( Alas!"
What cruel Myrmidon, or Dolopian, or who of hardened Ulysses' band, could in the very relation of such woes refrain from tears?")
Many, with their wives and children, taking their provisions, forsook their houses.
The Rev.
R. Tomlinson, the minister, also fled in fear, and left the holy threshold of the church; and afterwards George Postlethwaite, the parish clerk, departed with hasty steps in that calm night. "
We left the bound of our country and our pleasant fields.
We fled our country," lest the cruel fury should seize us.
Everyone hastened away protected by his faithful friend( the minister), and turned his back on the infected town.
Many with straw and small leafy branches of trees constructed humble cabins, in which were placed several infected persons, who might return occasionally to their own houses.
But the magisterial authority allowed a few others, who were never affected by the disease, to dwell in the adjacent villages.
Suddenly the plague raged with flaming fury, and ultimate darkness closed very many eyes.
Then all the inhabitants began to quake with cold fear; they were astonished, and chilling horror raised their pendant hair, for the plague raged everywhere in the town, and thence it was unlawful, nay even impracticable, for any person to depart, because the bridges and roads were attended by sentinels, armed with clubs, both night and day.
Virgil, AEn., Liber.
Ii., 1.
6.
Virgil, Ecl.
L. The pestiferous Lancaster and his associate Noble, two wicked homicides, who feared not death, nor regarded the Deity, committed the dead bodies to the grave at the close of the evening.
In performing this office, they placed the corpse upon a ladder, then proceeded hastily to the sepulchre, and there presumed to throw the dead body of a dear friend into the grave, as the lifeless trunk of a mariner is often cast into the sea, for the doors of the church were closed, and the funeral bells were silent.
Many people closed their own doors, and sorrowfully wandered alone through the country, over the fruitful plains.
Boys durst not go with their mothers, and fathers refused to associate with their children.
Here the master was odious to the men-servants, and the mistress to the maid-servants.
Pale death gnawing their breasts, they drooped their heads and wandered in solitary places, odious and dangerous to all; their companions and dear friends avoided these miserable people like bloody monsters.
Sixty persons were sent to the sepulchre in eight days, nine of whom died in one night.
A mournful clamour ascended to the stars; doleful complaints both night and day resounded through the liquid sky, with a continual repetition of sighs, until at last the town was confused with the lamentations of the dying.
For" as when a flame is driven by the furious south winds upon the standing corn, or as a torrent impetuously bursting form a mountain river desolates the fields, desolates the rich crops of corn, and all the labours of the ox, and precipitately carries away whole woods" and banks of rivers, so did the plague destroy a great number of people. "
Woe is me!"
exclaimed to aged matron," the cruel fury has seized my husband."
And the father, with tearful eyes, said," Ah, alas!
death possesses all my children, now there is no hope of living."
Indeed, then, the safety of the infected was to entertain no hope of safety.
Who can recite the tears, the lamentations and the sorrows of this time?
My ability is insufficient.
Virgil, AEn., L.
Ii., 1.
304.
Virgil, AEn., L.
Ii., 1.
354.
To many the pestiferous Lancaster gave a kind of black medicine, the efficacy of which suddenly destroyed the memory and understanding of the infected, for a bloody plasma infuriated their minds, and, rendering them delirious, they beat out their brains against door-posts and walls, and perished ignominiously.
Others he ordered to drink potations mingled with blood, by which means they were bereft of their senses and the whole use of their reason.
What demon could have invented anything more cruel than this?
The machination is deep to many.
This disease destroyed the rich, the brave, the young, the needy, fathers and mothers, masters and servants.
Neither blooming youth, excelling in invincible strength, nor the sagacious policy of the aged, neither medical knowledge, nor suppliant entreaties, nor the golden donations of the wealthy, could arrest this terrible plague, which entered many houses in the calm night, extirpated the human race in a few days, and left dire death the sole occupier of the empty apartments.
The inhabitants poured out tears, they stretched their hands towards heaven, and groaned out sorrowful complaints.
Having taken off their clothes when the celestial orb of day begun to crimson the ocean, they prepared to go to bed, but did not expect to live many hours, so great was the violence of the disease.
The pleasant plains, in consequence of this grievous calamity, continually resounded with female lamentations.
At length the bells of the church began to dispense their sounds, and the people assembled in mournful array, to perform the funeral rites with pious hymns over the bodies of their dear friends in the lowly tomb.
And as the impetuous, furious whirlwinds in the autumn disturb the boughs of the trees, and disperse the leaves upon the grass, so did men fall by the plague, and filled the policandron( i.e., church-yard).
The neighbouring people gave many necessaries of life to the sorrowful townsmen, and to those miserable persons inclosed in the gulp of death.
The renowned John Preson, Esq., worthy of eternal honour - whom many the celestial powers always preserve - took care to distribute milk, bread, and money to the needy.
This pious gentleman gave many presents to the little ones, and took care that the rapid infection of the plague should not advance and spread abroad in other small towns, for which attention, there is no doubt, O Preston, but Almighty God will give you rewards worthy of your great merits.
The just man will never fail in a recompense.
You, too, O Kirkby, the faithful guardian and greatest comfort of your fallen country, you have been the fortress of the needy; you have given upright laws and ordinances; you have wisely placed strong restraints upon the malignant, and firm confidence in the good and those immersed in chilling fear.
Your glory, renowned father of your country, ascends to the skies; and while a series of many years shall rehearse your name, may posterity always celebrate your praise. "
Whilst I have any remembrance of myself, while I have a soul to animate these limbs," my tongue shall always proclaim your excellent commendations.
The miserable townsmen, infected by the cruel plague, declare that they will bestow on your merit honours worthy of Meconas; the task, however, transcends the highest effort of my mortal brain, and exceeds the utmost energy of my mind.
The fixed brass above the doors shall therefore preserve the memory of the brave General, whose honour shall also be inscribed in lasting marble.
Virgil, AEn., L.
Iv., 1.
336.
After the violence of the plague had increased more grievously, it blazed with immense flames in respectable houses.
Then the prudent justice of the peace cast the pestiferous Lancaster, and Noble, his associate in the evil, into dark prison, where the depopulators of our country lived, as it were, in the gulph of death, and received all the light they enjoyed through the chinks of the door.
But they deserved a punishment more grievous than this - they ought to have been cast into the rapid streams of the cast Phlegethon, unless the sorrowful complaints manifested through all cities of the kingdom, and to our ears slander the men, and surviving fame belies our town.
What does that cruel bird deserve, which, with its sharp bill and crooked talons, tears its own brood to bloody pieces?
Lo!
birds are taught by instinct to defend their mates with all their might, they are seldom seen to contend in battle, nor will they even wound the side of a kindred companion, - so great is the concord of the feathered tribe.
Lo!
hungry tigers, which assemble with one another in long troops upon the mountains, wage not war with themselves, but lie down peaceably together amongst the cold rocks.
Even this ferocious wild beast is a sociable friend to its own species.
But this pestiferous, this false, this execrable barbarous, this abandoned, cruel, atrocious outlaw, Lancaster, presumed to administer dire infection to many, and his vile hands compounded poisons which suddenly penetrated the system, and destroyed the infected patient.
This craver of plunder and spoil, for a long time drew the fickle vulgar into his false opinion, by declaring openly, believe me, that the disease is not to be feared; that those whom Almighty God has marked with the image of death will alone tread the paths of dissolution.
Thus the commonality, blinded by false assurances, increased the plague by visiting their friends.
Wicked Lancaster, thou didst study to excite the violence of the disease amongst thy neighbours, until Kirkby, one of his Majesty's justices of the peace, shut thee up in prison.
Thou, O friend of death, didst lead very many people to invincible slaughter.
Thy assiduity loaded the boat of Charon.
What demon prompted thee to devise such horrible deeds?
Thou hast been more cruel than Hyrcanian tigers, worse than the ferocious panther, and more savage than the Lernoan hydra.
The consuming plague raged seven months in this town, with acute flames more fervent than the Sicilian AEtna, and, in this space of time, did cruel death devour three hundred and sixty inhabitants.
I am witness to a great many burials.
The Almighty God being angry at our wicked lives sent this severe punishment as the equivalent of our offences; a punishment, nevertheless, just, if we deserved not a greater, therefore we must acknowledge that our sufferings were comparatively in the least degree.
Seeing we are all deserving of bitter chastisement because of our egregious offences.
But had the Supreme Ruler of Heaven and Earth then taken his just vengeance of us, oppressed as we were with the load of our iniquities, immersed in the labyrinth of sin, and sinking under a multitude of errors, our bodies and souls had long since entered the gates of death.
But Almighty God, merciful, forgiving, and just, to whom let us render all honour and praise, with heart, with pious voice, and with all bodily might and power, instantly led us miserable sinners from horrible death, and withdrew his arms from our neighbours.
The destructive plague having ceased, the church, together with the whole town, were purified with frankincense and sulphur.
The terrible disease terminated by the Divine command.
And may God grant that the like plague may never more oppress our town, or disturb our walls.
But who can enumerate the complaints of this fatal period?
Who can express the groans and lamentations?
Or who knows truly how to write lugubrious narratives of these in verse.
Those whom lately I saw remarkable for firm strength and health, now, even now, repose in the bosom of the earth.
Those whom yesterday I saw endure hard labour, to-day were carried by neighbours to their lowly tombs.
Thirty Two men, together with their wives, are bereft of their fostering life.
Twenty Two widows are reported to be living, the husbands of whom died, and sixteen men whose wives cold death possesses.
This is lamentable to relate.
Many parents are bereft of their dear children, and, at the same time, many children of their parents.
The sorrowful girls, whose fathers are dead, weep and pierce the celestial regions with their lamentations. "
Such is the howling as when a bull has fled wounded from the altar, and has eluded his neck the erring axe."
Virgil, AEn, Liber Ii.
1.
223 et 224.
After many sorrowful funerals and the destruction of the town, the people purified the houses, as I have previously mentioned, with frankincense, bitumen, myrrh, fictitious powder, and sulphur, and at the same time burnt their garments and infected bedding( pannis), and all the inhabitants gave solemn assurances upon receiving the anniversary sacrament to surrender to the purifyers( tesoribus), all goods contained in their houses, without fraud or deceit, nor to preserve anything stored up in secrecy; because by clandestinely withholding infected garments, they might afterwards greatly endanger the town.
But yet( I shudder even at the relation of these circumstances) the wicked perjuror Noble, a person false and belying the name, and his wife, had privately concealed in a granary amongst heaps of corn, in beds and other places which were opened in their apartments, rugs( tegetes) and many sheets( lintea), garments, gowns, shirts( suppera), webs( telas), and several other articles privately collected in the time of the plague.
What could these plunderers of our country do with these infected garments, uncleansed of their black poison?
O, malignant wretches, did ye preserve them for new nourishments of the dire pestilence and a future disease.
What deceitful demon could devise more atrocious deeds?
What Circe give more grievous vitriolated poison?
What Styx, what Phlegethon, be more terrible, or which Erinnys a greater Fury?
The subtle Ulysses subverted the splendid walls of Troy by deceit, and, in hostile flames, destroyed the name of potent Priam.
Even so the introducer of the plague and his wicked companions laid waste our town in which many young men, the stately column of the place, were snatched away from the public by this insatiable disease.
It pleased these cruel pests to extirpate mortals, and they even rejoiced to thrust the human race from off the earth, that they might obtain the spoil, and enrich themselves by deceit and theft, the law being silent.
This infernal Tartarean race, these dire furies did these things once, as I have said already, and then endeavoured a second time to light up the warn flames with the embers; in other words they preserved the memorials of the disease, and endeavoured to renew the relics of the last into a second plague; for mischief was concealed in their hearts; a knotted chain surrounded their unfeeling breasts; hard brass and adament encased their hearts; their foolish brains were occupied by bloody studies.
An infernal demon must have taught you, ye malignant ravishers of our country, to glut yourselves with paternal blood; to tear the new-formed skin off the ribs of your friends; to prepare many bodies for the savage bier( fero pheretro) almost in a few hours, and to remove many innocent people from the public.
It was not sufficient mischief for the Fury and the servants of the black demon to send three hundred and sixty innocent people at once to the grave, their lives being crimeless and all of them true worshippers of the Deity.
But did ye not a second time endeavor to renew the fatal disease?
By preserving in darkness the cruel seeds of the plague, namely, gowns and other articles replete with bloody putrefaction, and clothes( exuvias) sprinkled with deadly poison.
I complain of nothing but the truth; what I write is known to all the world.
Then tell me, O reader, were not these darts of death, deposited in a cruel and laborious quiver( immani seduloque pharetro)( I shudder at the thought) prepared for the destruction of men?
Whoever you are, now weigh these circumstances maturely, and meditate with me upon this cruel affair from the beginning.
If I am wrong correct me; such is my opinion.
I do not speak fictions, but what good authority brought to my ears.
This machination is known to many.
As soon as this cruel affair was known to the joyful townsmen and the magistrates( as I think the celestial powers ordained it), a new tremor seized their frail limbs.
On every side they wept and beat their breasts.
- Kirkby, Esq., the monuments of whose praise will endure as long as the stars enlighten the earth by night, while Almighty Jove rules the high Olympus, while Atlas supports the world, and Pluto reigns in darkness, apprehended those wicked people by warrant and chained them in prison, while Noble and his wife were likewise shut up in gloomy confinement.
What punishment did the not deserve?
They placed firebrands with their own wicked hands to the walls, and, as it is reported, raised the dire flames in the beginning with much fuel.
Let the counsellor, the learned judge, and the skilful lawyer, weigh with just discretion, and now let us all in due order consider every circumstance with acute penetration( ingenius acutis).
For the first fury of the plague being almost extinguished, these wicked people dared to preserve the warm embers in the ashes, the law forbidding, and humanity opposing the wickedness.
O, I wish that I could have seen these cruel fiends suffering the punishments of the cross, with a halter knotted round their vile necks!
for such they deserved, if I am not mistaken.
However, if the law does not choose to chastise those wicked people with some deadly punishments, yet let them undergo exile, nor let them inhabit our houses, nor come under our roofs, nor permit them to join us, who are afraid of them as associates.
Ye magnanimous defenders of the peace and salubrious law, forbid them to approach our walls, because, whilst they tarry amongst us, there will never be any firm confidence in us, who are disquieted; nor will firm hope remain while we behold these wicked despoilers of our country living in it.
For we all believe( may God pardon our errors if we judge falsely) the inhabitants( incoloe), and likewise the neighbours who remained uninfected( intacti) by the destructive plague, the circumstances being duly arranged, that these tigers intentionally brought the cruel disease in bundles of rushed and jewels( fascibus niscis gemnisque), the Omnipotent Lord of Heaven not opposing the calamites begun and the deep machination.
Thus the just Lord of Heaven had ordained.
Our impious course of life was the cause of the grievous disease, because our sins roused the anger of almighty God.
We had many times offended him, therefore he afflicted us with punishments and several plagues.
Yet his goodness did not leave us, miserable sinners, afflicted with perpetual misery, but saved our souls from hell, withdrew his hand, and now extends his great comfort to us.
All ye nations praise his divine decrees.
What shall we give to a Lord so merciful and kind?
What must we offer up to Him who saved us from perdition?
Let us, therefore, receive as is mete, the full cup of health, and let us invoke His holy name with a triumphant voice, whilst we worship him with heart and mouth.
Lancaster and his wife do not now molest our walls, they lately departed( all glory be to God).
But the pestifer did not go unrevenged by the hands of the women, who, having vigilantly watched the gates and roads, assaulted him with stones, which severely wounded his head, and then contended with crooked staves.
To those by whom the wounds were inflicted( but not without a cause), the false abandoned Lancaster pretended he was killed, and pretended not to inspire air; for he, cunning rascal, laid upon the ground as if he were dead, and thus the wicked man finally evaded the vengeance of the women and fled, which was pleasant, and gave great joy to all.
Now let us shake the cruel yoke from our necks, and depart from the servitude of the atrocious demon, for yet a little while and our appointed times will come.
Let us undergo the pleasant yoke of Christ our saviour; from whence the greatest joys of perpetual safety, and from this sacred fountain new river flow.
Upon this stable rock let us build our firm hopes, and the force of the stormy tempest cannot move us.
Finally, let us worship our Lord God, who was the Creator of heaven and earth, and marked the earth with certain bounds, in spirit and in truth, and then, without doubt, we shall live in peace; nor will severe plagues, nor other maladies, hereafter oppress our town.
But Almighty God will stretch out his glorious right hand to us languishing by the way, and preserve us from horrible danger.
But now it is time to lower the sails from the mast.
I have swept the expanded ocean with water-sounding oars.
What I proposed, I have accomplished; reader, pardon my many errors, my ability for writing is but small. "
It is now time to stop the rivers - the meadows have drunk enough."
Virgil, Ecl.
Iii., 1.
111.
In the year 1630, there were buried of the Plague in London, 1317 persons; 274 were buried in 1631, and only 8 in 1632.
[ See Maitland's Observations concerning the Population of London, in the Philosophical Transactions.
Vol.
XL., No.
450, p.
407.]
Note B.
Page 139.
The Horn Of Egremont.
In Mr. John Linton's" Hand Book of the West Cumberland Railways," there are two versions given of the tradition of" The Horn of Egremont Castle."
The following is the one which connects that tradition with the ancient lords of Millom: - " One of the lords of Egremont was taken prisoner in the holy Wars, and gave his brother Hubert for surety, promising to ransom him by a certain time.
His promise not having been fulfilled, the pagans hanged up their luckless captive by his hair; but the Paynim's daughter cut him down with her dagger, and had him attended and set at liberty.
Hubert took home with him the hatterell of his hair and his bugle-horn, and, arriving at Egremont, blew the horn, and obtained admittance to the castle, much to the surprise of the guilty Baron, who abandoned all company, and would not look on his brother till he had been pacified by their friends.
The Baron afterwards gave his brother the lordship of Millom, which until then, formed part of the barony of Egremont; and the first lords of Millom had for their arms the horn and the hatterell."
Note C. Page 139.
The Reverend Robert Walker The following extracts are partly epitomised from Wordsworth's notes to his" Sonnets to the River Duddon," which contain a beautiful memoir of this remarkable man, who is still affectionately remembered in the secluded dales of the Lake Country, by the name of Wonderful Walker:" - " In the year 1709, Robert Walker was born at Under Crag, in Seathwaite; he was the youngest of twelve children.
His eldest brother, who inherited the small family estate, dies at Under Crag, aged ninety - four."
Robert was" a child of delicate frame and tender health," and therefore it was thought best to" breed him a scholar."
At that time school-houses were rare in these dales;" the children being taught to read and write in the chapel; and in the same consecrated building where he afterwards officiated for so many years, both as preacher and schoolmaster, he himself received the rudiments of his education."
" In his youth he became schoolmaster at Loweswater, not being called upon, probably, in that situation, to teach more than reading, writing and arithmetic.
But, by the assistance of a' gentleman' in the neighbourhood"( supposed to be the Rev.
H. Forest, at that time curator of Loweswater)," he acquired, at leisure hours, a knowledge of the classics, and became qualified for taking holy orders.
Upon his ordination he had the offer of two curacies; the one, Torver, in the vale of Coniston; the other, Seathwaite, in his native vale.
The value of each was the same, viz., five pounds per annum.
But the cure of Seathwaite having a cottage attached to it, as he wished to marry, he chose it in preference."
The person of his choice was a young domestic servant" of serious and modest deportment," who, by frugality, had saved a small sum of money, with which they began housekeeping.
In 1735 of 1736, he entered upon his curacy; and, nineteen years afterwards, his situation is this described in some letters to be found in the Annual Register for 1760, from which the following is extracted: - " To Mr.--" Coniston, July 26th, 1754. "
Sir, " I was the other day upon a party of pleasure about five or six miles from this place, where I met with a very striking object, and of a nature not very common.
Going into a clergyman's house( of whom I had frequently heard), I found him sitting at the head of a long square table, such as is commonly used in this country by the lower class of people, dressed in a coarse blue frock, trimmed with black horn buttons; a checked shirt, a leathern strap about his neck for a stock, a coarse apron, and a pair of great wooden-soled shoes, plated with iron to preserve them( what we call clogs in these parts), with a child upon his knee, eating his breakfast, his wife, and the remainder of his children, were some of them employed in waiting upon each other, the rest in teazing and spinning wool, at which trade he is a great proficient; and moreover, when it is made ready for sale, will lay it by sixteen or thirty - two pounds weight upon his back, and on foot, seven or eight miles, will carry it to the market, even in the depth of winter.
I was not much surprised at all this, as you may possibly be, having heard a great deal related before.
Bu I must confess myself astonished with the alacrity and the good humour that appeared both in the clergyman and his wife, and more so at the sense and ingenuity of the clergyman himself."
Then follows a letter from another person, dated 1755, from which an extract shall be given.
By his frugality and good management, he keeps the wolf from the door, as we say; and if he advances a little in the world, it is owing more to his own care than to anything else he had to rely upon.
I do n't find his inclination is running after further preferment.
He is settled among the people that are happy among themselves; and lives in the greatest unanimity and friendship with them: and, I believe, the minister and people are exceedingly satisfied with each other; and indeed how should they be dissatisfied, when they have a person of so much worth and probity for their pastor?
a man, who, for his candour and meekness, his sober, chaste, and virtuous conversation, his soundness in principle and practice, is an ornament to his profession and an honour to the country he is in; and bear with me if I say, the plainness of his dress, the sanctity of his manners, the simplicity of his doctrine, and the vehemence of his expression, have a sort of resemblance to the pure practice of primitive Christianity."
The next extract is contained in a letter from himself to a friend of his, at Lancaster.
It is to be found in this same place as the preceding one.
Speaking of a letter received from his friend, he says: - " I should have returned an immediate answer, but the hand of Providence, then laying heavy upon an amiable pledge of conjugal endearment, hath since taken from me a promising girl, which the disconsolate mother too pensively laments the loss of; though we have yet eight living, all healthful, hopeful children, whose names and ages are as follows: - Zaccheus, aged almost eighteen years; Elizabeth, sixteen years and ten months; Mary, fifteen; Moses, thirteen years and three months; Sarah, ten years and three months; Mabel, eight years and three months; William Tyson, three years and eight months; and Anna Esther, one year and three months; besides Anne, who died two years and six months ago, and was then aged between nine and ten; and Eleanor, who dies the 23d inst., January, aged six years and ten months.
Zaccheus, the eldest child, is now learning the trade of tanner, and has two years and a half of his apprenticeship to serve.
The annual income of my chapel at present, as near as I can compute it, may amount to about  17, of which is paid in cash, viz.,  5 from the bounty of Queen Anne, and  5 from W-- P--, Esq.
of P--, out of the annual rents, he being lord of the manor, and  3 from the several inhabitants of L--, settled upon the tenements as a rent-charge; the house and gardens I value at  4 yearly, and not worth more; and I believe the surplice fees and voluntary contributions, one year with another, may be worth  3; but as the inhabitants are few in number, and the fees very low, this last-mentioned sum consists merely in free-will offerings. "
I am situated greatly to my satisfaction with regard to the conduct and the behaviour of my auditory, who not only live in the happy ignorance of the follies and vices of the age, but in mutual peace and good-will with one another, and are seemingly( I hope really too) sincere Christians.
**** I got to the value of  40 for my wife's fortune, but had no real estate of my own, being the youngest son of twelve children, born of obscure parents; and, though my income has been but small, and my family large, yet, by a providential blessing upon my own diligent endeavours, the kindness of friends, and a cheap country to live in, we have always had the necessaries of life."
About the time when this letter was written, the Bishop of Chester recommended the scheme of joining the curacy of Ulpha to the contiguous one of Seathwaite, and the nomination was offered to Mr. Walker.
By this scheme his income would be augmented, and the usual duties divided between the two places.
With respect to this offer, he says in a letter to the Bishop," it might be disagreeable to my auditory at Seathwaite, as they have been always accustomed to double duty, and the inhabitants of Ulpha despair of being able to support a schoolmaster who is not curate there also, which suppresses all thoughts in me of serving them both."
In a second letter to the Bishop, on the same subject, he says," My lord, - I am exceedingly obliged on account of the Ulpha affair; if that curacy should lapse into your Lordship's hands, I would beg leave rather to decline than embrace it; for the chapels of Seathwaite and Ulpha, annexed together, would be apt to cause a general discontent among the inhabitants of both places, by either thinking themselves slighted, being only served alternately, or neglected in the duty, or attributing it to covetousness in me; all which occasions of murmuring I would willingly avoid;" and in concluding his former letter, he expresses a similar sentiment upon the same occasion," desiring if it be possible, however, as much as in me lieth, to live peaceably with all men."
Speaking of this passage in Mr. Walker's life, Wordsworth says," Scanty as was his income, the frequent offer of much better benefices could not tempt Mr. W. to quit a situation where he had been so long happy, with a consciousness of being useful."
This homely, pure-hearted, old country parson, with all his frugal thrift, devoted no small share of what he saved from such humble resources, to the liberal education of his numerous family; and he was, also," even munificent in hospitality as a parish priest."
" Every Sunday were served, upon the long table at which he has been described sitting with a child upon his knee, messes of broth, for the refreshment of those of his congregation who came from a distance, and usually took their seats as part of his own household.
It seems scarcely possible that this custom could have commenced before the augmentation of his cure; and what would to many have been a high price of self-denial, was paid, by the pastor and his family, for this gratification; as the treat could only be provided by dressing at one time the whole, perhaps, of their weekly allowance of fresh animal food; consequently, for a succession of days, the table was covered with cold victuals only. "
He loved old customs and old usages, and in some instances stuck to them to his own loss; for, having had a sum of money lodged in the hands of a neighbouring tradesman, when long course of time had raised the rate of interest, and more was offered, he refused to accept it; an act not difficult to one, who, while he was drawing seventeen pounds a-year from his curacy, declined, as we have seen, to add the profits of another small benefice to his own, lest he should be suspected of cupidity.
From this vice he was utterly free; he made no charge for teaching his school; such as could afford to pay gave him what they pleased.
When very young, having kept a diary of his expenses, however trifling, the large amount at the end of the year surprised him, and from that time the rule of this life was to be economical, not avaricious.
At his decease he left behind him no less a sum than  2000; and such a sense of his various excellences was prevalent in the country, that the epithet of Wonderful is to this day attached to his name. "
There is in the above sketch something so extraordinary as to require further explanatory details: and to begin with his industry, eight hours in each day, during five days in the week, and half of Saturday, except when the labours of husbandry were urgent, he was occupied in teaching.
His seat was within the rails of the altar; the communion table was his desk, and, like Shenstone's schoolmistress, the master employed himself at the spinning-wheel, while the children were repeating their lessons by his side.
Every evening after school hours, if not more profitably engaged, he continued the same kind of labour, exchanging, for the benefit of exercise, the small wheel at which he had sate for the large one on which wool is spun, the spinner stepping to a fro.
Thus was the wheel constantly in readiness to prevent the waste of a moment's time.
Nor was his industry with the pen, when occasion called for it, less eager.
Intrusted with extensive management of public and private affairs, he acted, in his rustic neighbourhood, as scrivener, writing out petitions, deeds of conveyance, wills, covenants, etc., with pecuniary gain to himself, and to the great benefit of his employers.
These labours( at all times considerable), at one period of the year, viz., between Christmas and Candlemas, when money transactions are settled in this country, were often so intense, that he passed great part of the night, and sometimes whole nights, at his desk.
His garden also was tilled by his own hand; he had a right of pasturage upon the mountains for a few sheep and a couple of cows, which required his attendance; with this pastoral occupation he joined the labours of husbandry upon a small scale, renting two or three acres in addition to his own, less than one acre of glebe; and the humblest drudgery which the cultivation of these fields required was performed by himself. "
He also assisted his neighbours in hay-making and shearing their flocks, and in the performance of the latter service he was eminently dexterous.
They, in their turn, complimented him with the present of a hay-cock or a fleece; less as a recompense for this particular service than as a general acknowledgement.
The Sabbath was in a strict sense kept holy, the Sunday evenings being devoted to reading the scripture and family prayer.
The principal festivals appointed by the church were also duly observed; but through every other day in the week, through every week in the year, he was incessantly occupied in work of hand or mind; not allowing a moment for recreation, except upon a Saturday afternoon, when he indulged himself with a newspaper, or sometimes with a magazine.
The frugality and temperance established in his house were as admirable as the industry.
Nothing to which the name of luxury could be given was there known; in the latter part of his life, indeed, when tea had been brought into almost general use, it was provided for visitors, and for such of his own family as returned occasionally to his roof, and had been accustomed to this refreshment elsewhere; but neither he nor his wife ever partook of it.
The raiment worn by his family was comely and decent, but as simple as their diet; the homespun materials were made up into apparel by their own hands.
A the time of the decease of this thrifty pair, their cottage contained a large store of webs of woollen and linen cloth, woven from thread of their own spinning; and it is remarkable that the pew in the chapel in which the family used to sit, remains neatly lined with woollen cloth spun by the pastor's own hands.
It is the only pew in the chapel so distinguished; and I know of no other instance of his conformity to the delicate accommodations of modern times.
The fuel of the house, like that of their neighbours, consisted of peat, procured from the mosses by their own labour.
The lights by which, in the winter evenings their work was performed, were of their own manufacture, such as still continue to be used in these cottages; they are made of the pith of rushes dipped in any unctuous substance that the house affords.
White candles, as tallow candles are here called, were reserved to honour the Christmas festivals, and were perhaps produced on no other occasions.
Once a month, during the proper season, a sheep was drawn from their small mountain flock, and killed for the use of the family; and a cow, towards the close of the year, was salted and dried for winter provision; the hide was tanned to furnish them with shoes.
By these various resources, this venerable clergyman reared a numerous family, not only preserving them, as he affectingly says,' from wanting the necessaries of life;' but affording them an unstinted education, and the means of raising themselves in society.
In this they were eminently assisted by the effects of their father's example, his precepts and injunctions; he was aware that truth-speaking, a a moral virtue, is best secured by inculcating attention to accuracy of report even on trivial occasions; and so rigid were the rules of honesty by which he endeavoured to bring up his family, that if one of them had chanced to find in the lanes or fields anything of the least use or value, without being able to ascertain to whom it belonged, he always insisted upon the child's carrying it back to the place from which it had been brought."
Speaking of the seemingly unfavourable circumstances in which Mr. Walker lived for the cultivation of the mind and the display of its graces, Wordsworth says: -" But, in this extraordinary man, things in their nature adverse were reconciled.
His conversation was remarkable, not only for being chaste and pure, but for the degree in which it was fervent and eloquent; his written style was correct, simple, and animated, nor did his affections suffer more than his intellect; he was tenderly alive to all the duties of his pastoral office; the poor and needy' he never sent empty away,' - the stranger was fed and refreshed in passing that unfrequented vale - the sick were visited; and the feelings of humanity found exercise among the distresses and embarrassments in the worldly estate of his neighbours, with which his talents for business made him acquainted; and the disinterestedness, impartiality, and uprightness which he maintained in the management of all affairs confided to him, were virtues seldom separated in his own conscience from religious obligation. "
The afternoon service in the chapel was less numerously attended than that in the morning, but by a more serious auditory; the lesson from the New Testament, on those occasions, was accompanied by Burkitt's Commentaries.
These lessons he read with impassioned emphasis, frequently drawing tears from his hearers, and leaving a lasting impression on their minds.
His devotional feelings and the powers of his own mind were further exercised, along with those of his family, in perusing the Scriptures: not only on the Sunday evening, but on every other evening, while the rest of the household were at work, some of the children, and in her turn the servant, for the sake of practice in reading, or for instruction, read the Bible aloud; and in this manner the whole was repeatedly gone through.
That no common importance was attached to the observance of religious ordinances by his family, appears from the following memorandum by one of his descendents, which I am tempted to insert at length, as it is characteristic and somewhat curious. '
There is as small chapel in the county palatine of Lancaster, where a certain clergyman has regularly officiated above sixty years, and a few months ago administered the sacrament of the Lord's supper in that same, to a decent number of devout communicants.
After the clergyman had received himself, the first company out of the assembly who approached the altar and kneeled down to the partakers of the sacred elements, consisted of the parson's wife - to whom he had been married upwards of sixty years - one son and his wife; four daughters, each with her husband; whose ages, all added together, amount to above 714 years.
The several and respective distances from the place of each of their abodes, to the chapel where they all communicated, will measure more than 1000 English miles.'
It would be unpardonable to omit that, in the maintenance of his virtues, he received due support from the partner of his long life.
She was equally strict in attendance of her share of their joint cares, nor less diligent in her appropriate occupations.
A person who had been some time their servant in the latter part of their lives, concluded the panegyric of her mistress, by saying to me,' She was no less excellent than her husband; she was good to the poor; she was good to everything!'
He survived a short time this virtuous companion.
When she died, he ordered that her body should be borne to the grave by three of her daughters and one grand-daughter; and when the corpse was lifted from the threshold, he insisted upon lending his aid, and feeling about( for he was then almost blind), took hold of a napkin fixed to the coffin; and, as a bearer of the body, entered the chapel, a few steps from the lowly parsonage. "
We have been dwelling upon images of peace in the moral world, that have brought us again to the quiet enclosure of consecrated ground, in which this venerable pair lie interred.
The sounding brook that lies close by the churchyard, without disturbing feeling or meditation, is now unfortunately laid bare; but not long ago it participated, with the chapel, the shade of some stately ash-trees, which will not spring again.
While the spectator, from this spot, is looking round upon the girdle of stony mountains that encompass the vale - masses of rock, out of which monuments for all men that ever existed might have been hewn - it would surprise him to be told, as with truth he might be, that the plain blue slab dedicated to the memory of this aged pair, is a production of a quarry in North Wales.
It was sent, as a mark of respect, by one of their descendants, from the vale of Festiniog, a region almost as beautiful as that in which it now lies!"
The following extracts are from a paper in the Christian Remembrancer, October 1819.
Mr. Wordsworth says of this paper; - It bears an assumed signature, but is known to be the work of the Rev.
Robert Bamford, Vicar of Bishopton, in the county of Durham; a great-grandson of Mr. Walker, whose worth it commemorates, by a record not the less valuable for being written in very early youth: - " His house was a nursery of virtue.
All the inmates were industrious, and cleanly, and happy.
Sobriety, neatness, quietness, characterised the whole family.
No railings, no idleness, no indulgence of passion were permitted.
Every child, however young, had its appointed engagements; every hand was busy.
Knitting, spinning, reading, writing, mending clothes, making shoes, were by the different children constantly performing.
The father himself, sitting amongst them, and guiding their thoughts, was engaged in the same occupations.
** " He sat up late and rose early.
When the family were at rest, he retired to a little room which he had built on the roof of his house.
He had slated it, and fitted it up with shelves for his books, his stock of cloth, wearing apparel, and his utensils.
There, many a cold winter's night, without fire, while the roof was glazed with ice, did he remain reading or writing till the day dawned.
He taught the children in the chapel, for there was no school-house.
Yet, in that cold, damp place, he never had a fire.
He used to send the children in parties, either to his own fire at home, or make them run up the mountain side.
**** " It may be further mentioned, that he was a passionate admirer of nature; she was his mother, and he was a dutiful child.
While engaged on the mountains, it was his greatest pleasure to view the rising sun; and in tranquil evenings, as it slided between the hills, he blessed its departure.
He was skilled in fossils and plants; a constant observer of the stars and winds; the atmosphere was his delight.
He made many experiments on its nature and properties.
In summer he used to gather a multitude of flies and insects, and by his entertaining description, amuse and instruct the children.
They shared all hid daily employments, and derived many sentiments of love and benevolence from his observations on the works and productions of nature.
Whether they were following him in the field, or surrounding him in the school, he took every opportunity of storing their minds with useful information.
Nor was the circle of his influence confined to Seathwaite.
Many a distant mother has told her child of Mr. Walker, and begged him to be as good a man.
**** " Once, when I was very young, I had the pleasure of seeing and hearing that venerable old man in his ninetieth year, and even then, the calmness, the force, the perspicuity of his sermon, sanctified and adorned by the wisdom of gray hairs, and the authority of virtue, had such an effect upon my mind, that I never see a hoary-headed clergyman, without thinking of Mr. Walker.
**** " Though he avoided all religious controversies, yet, when age silvered his head, and virtuous piety had secured to his appearance reverence and silent honour, no one, however determined in his hatred of apostolic descent, could have listened to his discourse on ecclesiastical history and ancient times, without thinking that one of the beloved apostles had returned to mortality, and in that vale of peace had come to exemplify the beauty of holiness in the life and character of Mr.
Walker.
**** " Until the sickness of his wife, a few months previous to her death, his health and spirits and faculties were unimpaired.
But this misfortune gave him such a shock, that his constitution gradually decayed.
His senses, except sight, still preserved their powers.
He never preached with steadiness after his wife's death.
His voice faltered; and he always looked at the seat she had used.
He could not pass her tomb without tears.
He became, when alone, sad and melancholy, though still among his friends kind and good-humoured.
He went to bed about twelve o'clock the night before his death.
As his custom was, he went tottering and leaning upon his daughter's arm, to examine the heavens, and meditate a few moments in the open air. "
How clear the moon shines to-night!"
He said these words, sighed, and laid down.
At six next morning he was found a corpse.
Many a tear, and many a heavy heart, and many a grateful blessing followed him to the grave."
Such was the venerable patriarch of Seathwaite, in Duddon Vale, of whom Wordsworth thus speaks in his sonnette on" Seathwaite Chapel:" - " Sacred Religion!'
mother of form and fear,' Dread arbitress of mutable respect, Now rites ordaining when the old are wrecked, Or cease to please the fickle worshipper; Mother of Love!
( that name best suits thee here) Mother of Love!
for this deep vale; protect Truth's holy lamp, pure source of bright effect, Gifted to purge the vapoury atmosphere That seeks to stifle it; as in those days When this low pile a Gospel teacher knew, Whose good works form an endless retinue: A pastor such as Chaucer's verse portrays; Such as the heaven-taught skill of Herbert drew; And tender Goldsmith crowned with deathless praise!"
Note D. Page 169.
The Beauty Of Buttermere.
The following brief statement of the story of Mary, the Beauty of Buttermere, is given from Black's Guide to the Lakes: -" She was possessed of considerable personal charms, and, being the daughter of the innkeeper, her usual employment was to wait upon those guests, who, at that time, made their way so far into the heart of the hills.
Her beauty, in this way, became the theme of what may be called extensive praise.
A man, who designated himself the Honourable Colonel Hope, brother of Lord Hopetoun, but whose real name was Hatfield, fleeing from the arm of the law to these sequestered parts, was struck with Mary's attractions, and paid his addresses to her.
No great length of time elapsed after the marriage before he was apprehended on a charge of forgery.
He was tried at Carlisle, and being found guilty, suffered the extreme penalty of the law.
Mary married, for her second husband, a respectable farmer of Caldbeck, and died a few years ago."
Note E. Page 169.
Char.
This dainty fish is found in Ennerdale Lake, Ullswater, Crummock Water, Buttermere, Windermere, and Coniston Lake.
It is found, also, in Llynn Quellyn, near the foot of Snowdon; in certain lakes in Merionethshire; and, before the discovery of the copper mines, in those of Llanberis; but in the last the fish have been nearly destroyed by the mineral streams.
In Scotland, it is found in Loch Tay, Loch Inch, and other neighbouring lakes; and in Fewin Loch, Sutherlandshire.
In Ireland it is abundant in Loch Esk.
This fish frequents the deepest parts of these lakes, and feed principally by night.
There are two varieties of char, the red char, and the gilt or case char, supposed to be distinct species.
The red char is the Salmo salvalinus of naturalists, as the case char is the Salmo Alpinus.
There is, however, much wanting to elucidate these two varieties.
The car found in the Welsh lakes is said to be a distinct species, but Agassiz, the Genevese naturalist, states that the char of the north of England is identical with the ombre chevalier of the Lake of Geneva.
Black's guide to the Lakes says of this fish," It has been conjectured that the char was introduced into these lakes by the Romans, who, in the decline of the empire, were withheld by no considerations of trouble or expense from gratifying their luxurious appetite."
Note F. Page 175.
The Huntsman's Inn At Wastdale Head.
By mistake, no reference is made on page 175 to this note.
But the reader will find there an account of my first arrival at the well-known house of Mr. William Ritson, the" Huntsman's Inn," at Wastdale Head.
In the same place there is an allusion to a conversation between Mr. Ritson and the Borrowdale guide concerning the feeding of hunting-dogs, on which subject I learnt that Ritson was a good authority.
I found, also, that in addition to their fame as guides, and their general good qualities the Ritsons have been notable as bold hunters and crags-men among those wild mountains.
The extraordinary chase, described in the following extract, took place a few days after my visit to Wastdale Head, in the autumn of 1860.
The description is so very spirit-stirring in itself, that I do not like to pass it by; and as, in addition to that, at least three of the persons mentioned in connection with this unparalleled fox-hunt, are persons I met with at Mr. Ritson's house.
I insert it here, as it appeared in the Ulverstone Advertiser, in the month of November 1860: -" The Coniston subscription hounds threw off on Holmfell, about two miles of Coniston.
Only seventeen dogs were uncoupled, all, however, of the right sort, and in condition to run for a man's life.
They quickly hit on a drag, and" Reynard," no doubt hearing them, stole away, and so got, it is conjectured, three - quarter's of an hour's start before they dragged up to his resting-place.
They then settled on the line of the scent, at a rattling pace round the Fell to the Yew Trees, and across the country to the Tarns, near Hawkshead.
He had been going upwind for this three to four miles, and turned back over High Cross, past the lake residence of Mr. Marshall, and on to Yewdale Crag.
The ascent is long, steep, and one of the roughest amongst the northern fells, from the great quantity of loose stones on the sides of the hill.
When out on the top, reynard, it is probable, thought he would bid a final adieu to his pursuers.
He proceeded right on end over a long tract of moor and hill to near Black Hall, the highest house in Seathwaite.
Here he made a round and steered back to Tilberthwaite mines, above Coniston, turned again and boldly ascended Tilberthwaite High Fell, which he crossed, and over a long rough tract of country to Wrynose, a steep mountain pass well known to tourists between Eskdale and Langdale.
On Wrynose he lay down amongst some furze, and a second glorious unkennel took place.
The chase had continued, without a check, for fully thirty miles over some of the roughest hill country of the north, and went on at a great pace by Red Tarn to the foot of Bow Fell, with one or two exceptions, the highest mountain in England.
All the hardy footmen of Coniston and Seathwaite were" tailed off."
Reynard fearlessly ascended the mighty hill and crossed some little distance from the summit, then by the Stake at the head of Langdale and into Borrowdale.
A few shepherds from Langdale followed and were joined by some Borrowdale men.
After a round, the gallant fox took Butterikeld High Fell and all were" tailed off" again.
Then by Eskhause over Scawfell, upwards of 3000 feet above the sea, to Wastdale Head.
This dale with Mosedale Bottom is a flat of between four and five hundred acres, surrounded on three sides by the highest hills, Scawfell, Lingmell, Kirkfell, and Great Gable.
They made several rounds on the hill sides, and three dogs got crag-fast on Scafell.
The chase had lasted for six hours and it was getting dark.
Again the gallant fox faced the hills over Stye Head into Borrowdale and then back again to Wastdale head, some twelve miles of fearful ground to go over.
The chase, was, however, not near over.
Leaving Wastdale the hounds were heard through Copeland Forest, Gillerthwaite, and to Ennerdale Lake.
They ran clear round the lake.
It was night, and the residents on its borders could not join, but listened with pleasure and surprise to the cry of the dogs awakening the echoes of the hills.
About nine o'clock, the inhabitants of the secluded dale of Wastdale, about retiring to rest, were startled by the cry of the hounds coming back from Ennerdale.
They could of course make nothing out by following them, but judged by the still cheerful cry of the hounds that they went through the valley and headed away by the long mountainous pass of Styehead for Borrowdale.
On such a calm night the deep tone of the fox-hound was heard amongst the hills at a great distance.
The Ritsons and others listened delighted awhile, till their practised ears were greeted three different times with the savage bark of the dogs, a sure indication they were viewing.
Then there was no further sound heard.
Perfect stillness reigned over hill and valley.
Next day some of the dogs wandered into Wastdale, bit about the face and bloody, shewing that the death fight had taken place between them and the stoutest fox remembered in the north.
A young man named Burns and the Ritsons the day following recovered the crag-fast dogs by lowering the former down the rocks with ropes.
None but those accustomed to rescue sheep would have attempted such a hazardous feat as to be swung down the rocks to a narrow ledge and from the dizzy height several hundred feet of clear space beneath.
The huntsman arrived next day at Wastdale, and all the dogs were got together except one.
This, worn out, and nearly dead, did not arrive at Coniston till the end of the week."
This small pack - hardly ever over twenty - has been long famed for speed, stoutness and acute nose.
Twelve years ago they killed twenty - eight foxes in twenty - nine consecutive unkennels.
We much doubt it if any other pack in the kingdom has done the same; and what other dogs could have run the chase we attempted to describe - certainly not less than one hundred miles - across a terrific country, with only a single check in Wastdale for eight of ten minutes.
