Wednesday.
Sept. 1st Walked out in the Morning to the Castle.
It is a fine old Building spoiled by some more modern additions-- it has one small Turret remaining which is discernible at a great distance.
It has been in many hands.
It formerly belonged to the Stanleys&amp; is now in the Possession of a great grandson of Col. Chartres.
From the Top you see the Course of the River, which must have looked better a few years ago before so much Wood was cut down by its side.
It is a small one&amp; joins the Lune after a short course.
I believe it is only a Beck.
Walk round the Castle&amp; see the remains of greater things, but it never appears from the part which is tolerably entire to have been a place of strength except from its situation.
To the North are some very extensive moors, but in general a pretty cultivated country.
The River would appear to more Advantage if it did not run straight a little beyond the Castle which gives it the air of a Cut or Navigation, an Effect which the Wood must have destroyed.
From Hornby to Lancaster 9 miles.
The country in general very pretty&amp; Ingleborough commonly visible behind you.
Coal Mines near the Road between Hornby&amp; Lancaster, which are carried in little carts drawn by one Horse.
About 3 miles from Lancaster opens a View the finest of the kind I ever beheld though I saw it to great disadvantage in an indifferent day&amp; did not get the precise station.
An exceedingly rich cultivated Valley in which Villages&amp; Gentlemen's Seats are everywhere visible sufficiently to give the View an air of Population.
Through it winds the Lune fringed with wood on both sides&amp; edged with meadows at intervals.
2 planted Hills just not opposite to each other close the side near you&amp; at the distance of 19 miles reposes Ingleborough, a complete background to the Picture, and the Interval the Mind fills up( if the Eye be not powerful enough to ascertain) with Ideas of pastoral riches, grandees and population.
It is worth while to stay a day at Lancaster to see this View to advantage, which I should have done if I had not travelled post haste to meet Mr. Bertie.
The entrance into Lancaster is found fault with: within the Town it does not at first appear to advantage, but before you enter it you have a very broad River on your Right upon whose sides run an air of Business&amp;( to all appearance) over it tower the Church&amp; Castle which are fine objects.
Went to the Castle, a fine building for an account of which see West.
The day was thick&amp; I could but just discern the Cumberland&amp; Westmoreland Mountains, sinking by their height Ingleborough into a Hill.
Wrynose&amp; Hardknot are fine objects.
Go up to the top of it&amp; into the Churchyard where if the weather be fine you will have an excellent prospect.
The Castle Yard is a very airy one.
Thursday.
Sept. 2nd Went over the Sands to Ulverston by Cartmel&amp; Holker, 22 miles.
It is very pleasant Riding, since you are more at Liberty to look about you and less at the Road than you generally are the North Country,&amp; nowhere is there where it answers better to gaze with all your Eyes about you.
The Day brightened by degrees into a most charming one, but the Sun shone too bright to make distant objects so clear as I have sometimes known them.
West's account of the Ride is a very good one.
Ingleborough accompanies you to the Right for many miles, but when you see the Cumberland hills" in rude confusion hurled" its beauty becomes conspicuous not its sublimity.
Get a Guide close to the Sands who will tell you the names of the Mountains.
The sudden break into Westmoreland is wonderfully grand.
At Holker is a seat of Lord G. Cavendish, who has a large Estate in the neighborhood.
The People get Peats from the sides of the Hills.
You come into a Theatre of them which looking wild&amp; rude have a fine Effect.
Tell the Guide to go through Holker or he will carry you a different way.
There is an immense Quantity of Wood on Lord G's Estates, and the descent upon the Sands after you have ridden through the Woods is very fine.
You see at a great distance some most majestic Hills&amp; close to you is on the Right a great Bay dry at Low Water which gives you a View of the country replete with the Sublime&amp; beautiful.
If you be in a Chaise look behind you when you are about ¼ of a Mile from the Gate which goes upon the Sands.
You will see the most majestic trees growing close to the Sands,&amp; it must be delightful to walk under their cover when the Sea is up.
The whole ride is a most delightful one to Ulverston; you leave the Sands 3 miles from it.
A little before we left them the Tide was coming in a yard high at a great distance&amp; the Sun shining upon it shewed like a Range of Diamonds.
It has a curious appearance to see large Ships upon the dry Sand which are entirely left at low water many miles.
You see on the sands many Rocks which render the navigation very dangerous.
On your left the woods of Conishead Priory are visible.
Upon the whole, with the natural beauties of the Country, the fineness of the day and the lively air received from the Crowds of young men&amp; maidens hurrying to&amp; from Ulverston( pronounced Ouston) market the scene was the most delightful one I ever beheld.
The Town a great one.
The Inn crowded brim full of people.
The land hereabouts frequently lets from about 15s.
to 25s.
an acre, for rather more near Hornby.
From Ulverston to Ambleside 21 miles by Lowick Bridge&amp; the edge of Hawkshead-- you ride for 6 miles by the side of Coniston Lake and the Mountains at the Head of it are all wonderfully sublime.
You then mount a steep Hill, when turn to have a view of the Lake, rather before West directs you.
You then see Estwaite&amp; part of Windermere but it grew dark&amp; I went to Ambleside not enjoying the fine Scenes I might have been witness to in daylight.
Friday.
Sept. 3rd From Ambleside to Keswick 17 miles-- the day so gloomy that I did not enjoy the beauties of Grasmere so much as before.
The lake gives one the idea of Rasselas's happy Valley.
About this country-- Ambleside, Keswick etc.-- when they have cut the forrest Trees the old Roots are left in the Ground which sprout out innumerable shoots and these are cut in 14 or 15 years; consequently there is little Timber, but it suits their purpose which is to make Charcoal&amp; Posts&amp; Rails.
The View of Keswick from the Castle Rigg was not so good as 2 years ago when I saw it at sunrise, the sun illuminating the Top of the Rocks&amp; Mountains&amp; the Mist which the Wind drove about on the surface of the Lake with surprising Velocity.
Went in the afternoon to see Mr. P's House&amp; Island,&amp; returned to Keswick.
Saturday.
Sept. 4th Walked out in the Morning intending to go but to Cockshut Hill but got beyond Lowdore which( there having been a good deal of rain the day before) was tolerably full for the summer time.
Gray's&amp; West's accounts render any further description unnecessary.
The former's is best thing of the kind I ever read.
Went up Cockshut Hill whence, the day being dark, the Lake did not appear to great advantage, neither is the Station so good as some others.
At the entrance into Crow Park you have a fine view of Skiddaw which forms a semicircle in the right point of the View, inclosing a green field gently rising just before your Eye so as to conceal the intermediate Valley; on the Left Crosthwaite Steeple is just discernible&amp; 2 or 3 scattered Houses beautify the Scene as well as a small opening into the distant country.
From Cockshut Hill went left-hand to come close to the North side of the Road into Borrodale where there are some inchanting Views of the Lake, every moment a new one.
The closest are between Cockshut Hill&amp; Castle Grey.
You see to the Left the Lake swelled out till it is emprisoned by the Horrid Giant of Borrodale,&amp; the Lord's Isle&amp; sometimes the little Round one near it are visible.
You catch a Glimpse of the Water on the other side of Cockshut Hill.
( After I left it the day almost immediately brightened&amp; the Sun shone very bright whilst great heavy clouds sailed swiftly along throwing upon the surrounding Hills especially Skiddaw the grandest diversity of light&amp; shade,&amp; veiling now one part now another of his majestic front&amp; wrinkled seamed sides.)
This directs the Eye to the Right&amp; carries it through a beautifully cultivated Valley, where Crosthwaite&amp; Ormathwaite etc.
are capital objects till you catch the Water once more in the form of Bassenthwaite Water under a range of hills as far as the Eye can reach.
It wants but a bend&amp; swell at the end as that would besides its natural Beauty give one the Idea of its washing the far distant Hills, which are indistinctly seen beyond it.
Joined the Borrodale Road&amp; found or thought I found West's 3rd station which I should like better if one did not look across the Water.
As one walks by this side of the lake Causey pike towers above the rest of the Hills on the other side and the little peeps into the opposite Vale are singularly beautiful.
Met near Lowdore with a very civil Man who gave me some nuts, asked me to come in&amp; take shelter from a Shower of Rain&amp; offered to shew me a curious waterfall near his house.
Returned by the Borrodale Road&amp; after dinner took a walk between Skiddaw&amp; Keswick when a sweet innocent Girl directed me the way I should go.
Sunday.
Sept. 5th The Morning rainy but I had a short walk towards the South side of the Lake.
Went in the afternoon to Penrith 18 miles to see Cookson.
The Road very good, the Country nothing remarkable after you leave the Environs of Keswick.
The Road goes by the foot of Saddleback( so called from the Shape of its Top resembling that of a Saddle) a majestic mountain 3048 feet perpendicular Height; it has one or two brawny backs which look very grand&amp; of a purple tint almost all the way up to the Top, covered with Ling.
The tops of Cross Fell and some other high hills were shrouded in Clouds which overshadowed too the Coutry beneath them; that where I was was in the Shade too for some miles whilst an intermediate space, a pretty large one, was illuminated by the Sun&amp; contrasted with the Gloom of the other Country had a beautiful Effect.
There is an old Castle of Red stone on the Right as one enters Penrith.
Monday.
Sept. 6th Left Penrith about 9 o'clock, went to Carleton, Mr. Wallace's( the Solicitor General's) seat,&amp; rode by the Grounds.
About a mile from Penrith look directly behind you&amp; at the End of the Lane you catch the Castle in a very picturesque manner.
The country as far as Carleton except where you have Whinfell forest on the left has a very fertile appearance,&amp; from Mr. Wallace's is a beautiful view of the country, a bird's Eye one: the River winds at the Bottom of a wellwooded&amp; cultivated Valley&amp; there is at a small distance a very fine Ruin, Brougham Castle.
Many Hills are visible to the West&amp; in front Cross Fell at some distance.
It is certainly worth while to go this Way to or from Penrith to Keswick as it is not above a mile&amp; ½ about at most.
Rode by the side of the Eaman a clear broad River till I got into the Road, turned to the Left&amp; proceeded to Keswick.
Mell Fell is a remarkable Hill for it is very steep&amp; quite Green to the very Top.
Got off at a wrong place to see the Druids' Monument&amp; wandered about in search of it about an hour through a mistake in the maps.
I fortunately met with a Traveller who told me where it was.
It is in a field perhaps 50 yards distant&amp; visible from the Road about a 1/ 3rd of a Mile from the 2 Mile stone from Keswick, nearer to it.
Went upon the Water with Gisborne.
Skiddaw in a Cloud looked very majestic as it left much for the Imagination to work upon.
Caught 2 or 3 perch in the Keswick Fashion.
You hold in your hands a line just over the side of the Boat&amp; when you feel them bite you pull up.
The Trout season is over though one has sometimes a few for dinner.
Tuesday September 7th Kept in the House all day by the Rain, had some conversation with Gisborne in the morning.
Hammond&amp; Starkie arrived in the afternoon.
Wednesday September 8th Set out in the Morning with Hammond, Starkie&amp; Gisborne under the Conduct of Tom Hutton.
Went in the Borrodale Road till we come to Barrow Gill, about 2 miles&amp; ½ from Keswick at Noton House where we dismounted&amp; proceeded up the Hill on the Left.
It is a Waterfall well worth seeing.
The Water has worn its way through the solid Rock&amp; has in one Place formed a Bason in it which is very deep&amp; called the Prison from the impossibility there would be that a person put in could escape out of it.
Near it is another Waterfall, called Catgill, but we were told there was then no water in it.
Proceed about 200 yards till you come to a gate but instead of going through it turn to the Left were the Road leads up a Hill, Barrowside( the Hill whence Barrow Gill falls), in the Road to Ashness&amp; Watenlath, the latter of which about 3 miles off is a Tarn on the Top of a Hill which feeds Lowdore&amp; a small village of the name.
It is a bad road to it over the Mountains.
A little before you reach the 1st Gate in going up the Hill is a kind of Flat by the side of the Road where is one of the finest general Views of the Lake I ever saw.
Another not quite so good an one but where you have a sight of Lowdore&amp; Borrodale is higher up just beyond the 2nd Gate.
These should never be omitted.
But if you content yourself with going round the Lake once, without reversing that Round, you should turn about every moment that you may comprehend all the Beauties of this singular Place, Beauties which are changing every step you take.
Returned to the Road the same way we came,&amp; proceeded to Lowdore, which was tolerably full.
The sun shone very bright&amp; the scene was beautiful beyond description.
To see it properly you must not content yourself with West's station, but get down to the bed of the Waterfall, which you may very easily a little above to the Left.
Its appearance is then much more wonderful.
The Rock on the Left, Gowder Crag, is finer for the purpose than Salvator could have given; that on the Right, Shepherds Crag.
The Chasm is narrow&amp; in the Morning when you look up it is fine to see the Clouds sailing above you&amp; the Sun illuminating the Top&amp; foam of the Water when you yourself are in the Shade.
Look back upon the Lake&amp; Mountains.
On the Right, from behind a piece of Rock which projected, breasted forth a Torrent of Water which I caught in my Glass( through a tree romantically fixed in the Bare Rock&amp; twisted) shining like diamonds, a Picture the finest my eyes ever beheld.
Very little of this can be seen without descending,&amp; by varying your station&amp; going to all Parts you will discover new&amp; unparalleled Beauties.
Considered as a Waterfall I have seen superior, but taking in the accompaniments, the immense Rock on the Left steep as a Castle Wall&amp; whiter than they generally are in this Country, seen sometimes bare, sometimes through Trees fantastically disposed, with the back View of the Lake, never could such a scene enter into the Imagination of Man to conceive.
The fall is not a perpendicular one but the Rocks or Stones which prevent its being so it has but its own Violence strewed the way with,&amp; it leaps over them with irresistible fury.
They are sometimes all covered when it is said that the very Earth shakes beneath you.
It was with the utmost regret I quitted this most enchanting Scene.
Before you go up on the left see a little perpendicular fall on the Right of the Mill.
Went up Borrodale by Grange Bridge, some fine pointed Rocks on the left.
Came to the Bowder Stone, the River all the time bearing you company.
It answers to get off&amp; look under it.
It stands upon a Ridge almost as small as the Keel of a Ship.
Went up near Seathwaite&amp; saw the Mountains Great Gavel&amp; Great End which shut up the mouth of Borrodale.
On the left in a hollow of Glaramara rather before you reach it is Eagle Crag, from the Circumstance of there being an Eagle's nest there.
They lay two eggs once every year.
West's account of the taking of the young is strictly true.
Bull Crag, another of the Rocks on the left before Eagle Crag, is so called because the Eccho is there so great&amp; so often repeated that a Bull can never be held there long, above 2 years old, without going mad from the Returns of its own roarings.
I have heard of the same Thing happening in other mountainous Countries.
Above Seathwaite( the 2nd Village beyond Bowder, Rosthwaite 1st), on the top of the Hill, is the Wadd Mine.
It was opened last year when from their having taken out a double Quantity it is reckoned they have enough for a Consumption of 20 years.
It will sometimes sell for 25 or 30s.
a lib.
or 18 or 20s.
a lib.
The hole was formerly filled up with stones&amp; rubbish, the removal of which when it was last opened is said to have cost £ 300.
It is now filled up with Water except just at the Top which they can instantly remove by a Level made into the Side of the Hill, at little Trouble or Expence.
Returned to Grange, saw the young farmer where Gray was so civilly received, his name Caleb Fisher.
The Rocks opposite Grange look rudely thrown together.
The View into Borrodale finer than from the other Side of the Lake about ½ or ¾ of a mile from Grange.
The surprizing Blueness of the Water will or ought to strike very much.
Saw the Tracks down which come the Sledges loaded with Turf.
they are very small&amp; in the steepest places.
The sledges are without wheels and have 2 long Handles which the Man takes hold of.
To his Heels are spikes fixed&amp; to the Front of the Sled against which he; leans his Rump is a Cushion.
Glaramara a most surprizing Extent of bare Rock, which is broken in a wonderful manner like little hills upon a great Carpet of Rock.
Not far from Grange in the Side of the Hill are several Holes made in expectation of finding Lead Mines, none have been found.
Returned home through Portingscale&amp; by Crossthwaite Church.
Went in the Evening after dinner in the Boat to Swinside from whence is a fine View of the Vales of Newlands&amp; Keswick.
They looked like a Carpet under one, divided in all shapes&amp; by all colors.
The Hedge Rows( not a stone Wall in sight) are all mixed with Trees in them.
Bassenthwaite, for we saw it from one End to the other in a straight Line, looked like a ditch.
But the Afternoon was a very indifferent one&amp; none of its wooded sides are thence visible.
Under Swinside a curious Hill, a sandy color tufted with green Tufts, looked just like a great piece of spotted Cloth thrown over the Hill.
To the best of my Recollection it is in Foe Park; Foe Park is under Swinside.
Thursday September 9th Set out between 7&amp; 8 with Gisborne&amp; Tom Hutton, to Buttermere.
Passed through Portingscale&amp; through the delightful Vale of Newlands.
The Vale becomes less smiling as you proceed, till you come to where it appears to close up, the Hills on each Side&amp; those in front very high.
In your way to this place you have a very fine View of Catbells, Lady's Bower etc., viewing them on the Side contrary to that which you see from the Lake.
The Passage through the Mountains where it appears to be closed up is called Newlands Hawse.
On the Left is a Waterfall&amp; a little Bason in the Rock from whence it is fed.
In front a very great Waterfall.
Go through the Hawse&amp; you have a most striking Scene of Wildness&amp; Desolation.
A new collection of Mountains surrounds you.
This road has been improved since West's Account.
Before you reach Buttermere you see a very great Waterfall pouring down from one of the Hills which is near the Lake.
When we got to the Ale House we went to the left by the Side of Buttermere, dismounted&amp; walked close to the Water.
The Lake is a small on&amp; the Mountains rise directly from the Lake as Perpendicular as a Wall,&amp; of an immense height opposite to them are very high Rocks not close to the Water.
The Road to the left proceeeds into Borrodale by Honistar Crag and the Wadd Mine.
Returned&amp; went through the village of Buttermere.
( Goose Gate is a Right of putting&amp; fatting two geese on the common, Whittle Gate is a right of dining with his parishoners by turns every Sunday, Harden Sark such as the Carters use&amp; clog&amp; two strong Shoes annually.)
The lake of Buttermere one of the most savage ones I saw.
It has Char in it&amp; fine Trout.
To Crummock water, took a Boat across the Head of the Lake&amp; proceeded on foot by the side of it a little way; went about ½ a mile up on the Left just before we came to Mellbreack to see a Waterfall.
There is a Stone Wall which will carry a stranger to it.
It is in a Cleft of the Rock about 2 or 3 or 4 yds.
over&amp; it falls perpendicular about 30 yards as I imagine, the Country People say much more.
After it has fallen it proceeds in the Cleft about 20 or 30 yds.
where it falls for 10 or 12 feet into the open Valley.
To see it properly climb up beyond the first fall.
Whilst we were there it grew so thick that we could scarce see across the Lake&amp; a drizzly rain fell so that we could just discern Grassmire a vast red Hill standing opposite Mellbreak.
They look like guards on each side of the Lake.
Went to Scale Hill, got some Eggs&amp; Bacon&amp; rode home.
The Vales of Lorton and Brackenthwaite were seen to a sad disadvantage.
Came into the Whinlater Road at the 6th Mile Stone.
Saw Bassenthwaite below us on the left.
Friday September 10th Got up betwixt 5&amp; 6&amp; attempted to scale Skiddaw whose Top was quite clear when we( Mr. Hutton&amp; myself) set off.
Rode to the Bottom of the Hill&amp; there left our Horses.
After having ascended about as high as Latrigg, the steepest part of the Climb, the day overcast&amp; clouds entirely covered over ½ of the Mountain.
We staid, in hopes of the day mending, an hour, when we came down giving up all Expectation of a fine day.
On a sudden it brightened up&amp; we set forward a 2nd time,&amp; were again turned back, so that we determinded to be fooled no longer&amp; to give up the Scheme.
Our Labor however upon the whole was well rewarded, as from the Side of the Hill we saw the most Beautiful Scenes.
When we began to ascend the 1st Time the Sun shone upon the Lake which was as blue as the Sky&amp; as unruffled as a Looking Glass.
The Vale of Keswick looked beautiful beyond description, the peaceful retreat of some favored Mortals undisturbed by the Cares&amp; Concerns of the World.
There was but just wind sufficient to agitate the light vapor which sometimes dropped upon the Ground,&amp; then was gently raised up again.
The Village dogs barked, the Partridge called&amp; all was rural Peace&amp; pastoral Enjoyment.
Presently the vapor thickened and spread by degrees from the opening into Borrodale, till it entirely surrounded us so thick that we could not see even to the Bottom of the Mountain.
On a sudden in 4 or 5 minutes at the most it was below quite clear again( Nature's Curtain drew up&amp; discovered a most wonderful scene)&amp; it looked like that darkness of Chaos rolling off&amp; bringing to light a New Creation.
Such a scene my Eyes never beheld.
Dr. Brownrigg's House a pleasing object.
The inclination of the Mountain( foreshortening it) made the Cornfields&amp; Meadows at its Bottom appear close to me&amp; serve as a fore ground to the Rest of the Prospect.
The opening into Newlands Vale was very fine and induced one to think that there were other such retreats concealed amongst the other Mountains which we saw towering as far as the Eye could see.
Went upon the Lake about 12 o' Clock with Cookson&amp; Farrington.
It was perfectly calm&amp; the Mountains, Rocks&amp; Trees etc.
were reflected so perfectly on the Water that one could have discerned in the Reflection the smallest object&amp; in the Glass( which answered delightfully) it was difficult to say which was the Shadow and which the Reality.
The Ecchoes were vastly fine&amp; repeated like Thunder after one had imagined them lost.
Went to Lowdore which was not so full as before, so that there was not that breasting of the Water.
From thence walked through Grange to Castle Hill, which we ascended without much difficulty.
The best way of going up is by the Way which they bring the Slate, to which anyone at Grange will direct you, a very good walking way.
The View from it was the most striking I saw at Keswick.
An immense Rock on your Left, another near as high on your Right look like Giants to support Castle Hill the Champion of Borrodale.
From it you see under you a beautiful little Vale, watered by the River( which though in some parts beautifully winding is hardly large enough for the Purpose).
The Prospect is there quite a Bird's Eye one,&amp; ends in two little dells that appear to go in amongst the Mountains.
Under you to the north east is the Village Bridge of Grange&amp; beyond there is the inclosure&amp; river,&amp; over the Lake the most surprizing object of all, Skiddaw, who looked quite different from what I ever saw him before or since.
The sun shone upon every part of it&amp; it looked like the smiling King which West compares it to.
It was spread out in a most wonderful manner so as to form a complete Back Ground&amp; looked like the hundred - handed Giant Briareus.
On our way back looked in about Grange upon an extraordinarily sequestered Scene.
There was a green field almost encircled by Mountains. '
Tis on the left Hand&amp; a Gate opens from it into a narrow Lane just before, as a believe, you come to another Gate in the Lane.
From Lowdore to Keswick by water.
The Islands do not look well from Castle Hill being too near the other End of the Lake.
The best situation of viewing them is from the ascent up Skiddaw.
Saturday September 11th Set out in the morning to ride round Bassenthwaite, the Road to Ewsbridge, 9 miles, lies under Skiddaw which does not look so grand as from Keswick.
About 5 or 6 miles there is a wooded Hill, I think Wildthorpe,&amp; a great stretch of the Water in length and a Bend at the end.
It soon began to rain&amp; was thick all the Time.
Went round the other side, bad road, returned to Keswick, dined with Mr. Farrington.
Sunday September 12th Went to Church in the Morning&amp; heard an excellent Sermon.
After Church took a snack&amp; went up Skiddaw.
When we had got about ½ way to the Top, the day grew thick&amp; was never fine afterwards throughout; it was quite clear almost all round except into Borrodale etc.
by little slips at a Time.
The Sun shone very bright upon the Sea, upon which 6 or 7 Ships were seen quite plain with the naked Eye.
The View into Northumberland&amp; Scotland is very extensive.
The Isle of Man is very visible.
You see the Caldew from its rise 100 yds.
below you to where it falls into the Sea&amp; makes the Solway Firth.
You see a Hill which is said by the Guide to be near Newcastle,&amp; some hills are seen to the North which may perhaps be 90 or 100 miles off.
The Country to the North is a very fine one, that to the East not so good.
Brougham Castle looks 3 or 4 miles off, in reality 18.
Scruffel in Scotland attracts one's notice&amp; I do not wonder that the country people made them acquainted, as there is no rising ground betwixt them.
Skiddaw is parted from Saddleback by a little brook, Glenderaterra,&amp; comprehends several hill-lings, in all I should imagine not less at its base than 20 or 30 miles round.
Mr. Graham's House just in Scotland is a pretty object,&amp; the View is far greater than I could have supposed&amp; the objects seen much more distinctly.
Carlisle, lying low, is not visible.
The Air is very cold at the Top,&amp; the wind almost always very high.
Upon it are two Heaps of Stones, upon which people who go generally write their names, which are upon a ridge, narrow, at the very Top of the Mountain.
On the East side of this, the coldest, some most curious Plants&amp; Mosses grow on a little Earth between the Stones of which the side is composed for a considerable way.
The Ridge runs nearly north&amp; south.
Under you Bassenthwaite water&amp; another lake(&amp; upon the top of a Hill to the right a little Bason of Water) make appearance.
One may go up on Horseback the greater Part of the Way, as there are not stones till you get almost to the Summit,&amp; between the different Tops, on the Part that looks like the Seat of a little Saddle, is a mile&amp; ½ good riding.
There is not forming any Idea of the Height( Crossfell is blue, rises gradually&amp; is very distinctly seen closing the prospect 26 miles off to the East) of this stupendous mountain without ascending it&amp; seeing the Difference there is between the Heights of the several Points which look from below to be almost all upon a level.
They who have never been upon the Top of a very high Mountain cannot conceive that it is possible for Brydone's account to be not much exaggerated.
The Vales of Keswick, Bassenthwaite&amp; Newlands look like a Map or the Plan of an Estate with their different enclosures of a like size to those.
( It is too high to see the Lake etc.)
Walla Crag and the other Rocks look humble,&amp; Latrigg under your feet looks a green field not above the level of the ground,&amp; half way down the Mountain you can just perecive that it rises.
Its Top is perfectly green&amp; has a beautiful appearance; compare it to a Woman or a green Cushion.
I am at a loss to account for the appearance of the Sea which at the end of the Horizon looked as high or higher than we were.
In this country the clouds often collect in vast masses at a distance, generally over the Sea, blue or dark,&amp; put on the appearance of Mountains, Rocks, Fields etc.
; behind them the sun sets,&amp; looks better than retiring behind the Hills for the Edges of the Cloud look jagged like those of the Inside of the Crescent through any Telescope: red, yellow&amp; all colors.
Such a sun was setting, by much the finest I ever beheld.
Sheep feed almost to the top of Skiddaw.
Goats are not kept in this country because the sheep following them would tumble down the Precipices.
The Shepherds have known the snow between the Gills of Skiddaw 100 yards drift.
From the Top we saw a canopy of Cloud sailing over the Sea at a little distance which wild&amp; hairy-- like Eyebrows-- streamed like a Meteor.
To the Top from the foot reckoned 4 miles, from Keswick 5 ½ or 6.
September 13th Monday morning a very bad one.
Went a little way round Latrigg&amp; he bullied us.
Went up part of him where steepest.
Returned over the Wood bridge by the Penrith Road, dined, drank Tea with Farrington&amp; Miss Wood&amp; supped at Home with Haggard, Sumner etc.
Tuesday September 14th Cookson went to Cockermouth.
When I was going in the morning to Wyburn water my Horse proved lame.
Ordered him back&amp; walked to the Bridge over the Greta on the Penrith Road ½ a mile.
The Bridge is safe though not pleasant.
When over got into a Green Road that goes round at the foot sometimes at the Ankle of Latrigg&amp; it is an easy Walk which I have every body take that comes to Keswick.
It may be done in the ascent up Skiddaw, sending their horses to meet them by the Ormathwaite side of Latrigg.
Though the day was not perfectly fine, rather thick towards Borrodale, I have scarcely seen a pleasanter scene.
You look down upon the Vale of Keswick, on the south see the Vale of St. John's, Helvellyn,&amp; the River Greta winding its way to the Town, which looks beautiful, as well as Crosthwaite Church, the Prospect a Bird's Eye one.
Walking on you break at once upon Skiddaw&amp; most majestic&amp; portly does he shew.
Look upon the Right, Bassenthwaite Water is seen with Dr.
B.
's white House under you&amp; several cottages disposed along the Vale.
The Rocks of Borrodale to be viewed through a Glass.
Wallow Crag etc.
very fine.
Lowdore Falls.
Castle Hill&amp; Cockshut Hill&amp; an Island seen betwixt them.
The Vale of Newlands on each side of Swinside.
Ten thousand different inclosures&amp; Trees in Hedge Rows.
Went up Latrigg on the Side opposite Dr.
B.
's&amp; walked on till I saw the turns&amp; windings of the River which West speaks of, but not going the same was could not find his exact Stations.
Cross Fell blue&amp; gently sloping.
St. John's&amp; Helvellyn.
It began to rain very fast&amp; I was wet to Skin before I reached Keswick.
Instead of going with Mr. F. to Ormathwaite confined to House all night by the Wet.
( N.B.
In all our Rides by it we stopped for a minute at the Horseing Stone at the Vicarage.)
Wednesday September 15th Went in the morning to the Vicarage Garden.
The view sweetly pastoral&amp; the Church though new a fine object.
It rises as venerable as is consistent with simplicity&amp; humility.
The owner of the Living lives at Bottisham.
Hoped the day would turn out well&amp; set out for Cockermouth, in my way to see Bassenthwaite, 16 miles.
About 6 miles from Keswick turned down to Scareness, a wooded promontory.
It began to rain fast&amp; grew so thick that I could not see across the Lake.
Bradness we passed in our way to Scareness.
Unable to see anything we got into the Road again, a ¾ of a mile before Ewsbridge.
A great Hill breasts into the Water very finely near Ewsbridge( opposite Armathwaite) which returns a Bar of Music like that at Middleham.
The Landlord a very civil obliging man.
From Old Park above Armathwaite is said to be a very fine view of the Lake&amp; Derwent Water&amp; Borrodale.
Rode in the Rain to the Globe at Cockermouth over a dreadful Moor the greater part of the way.
Saw Whinlater on the Left.
Had Cookson for Supper&amp; a very good Bed.
Walked to the Castle&amp; heard the Derwent roar.
Thursday September 16th Bad unpromising day, so took a Chaise&amp; went to Whitehaven, 14 miles.
( on the Castle Hill great Quantities of Slate have been got for many years,&amp; in digging for it much freestone is found of various colors, though there is not other freestone to be had within 20 miles.
They find Stones too sometimes cut into a kind of Trough in which the Country Man told me it was conjectured the Romans used to feed their Fowls.)
The country between Cockermouth&amp; Whitehaven not very good.
About four miles from Cockermoth are 3 or 4 Coal Mines which have been worked many years&amp; 2 Steam Engines.
You see the Sea many miles before you reach Whitehaven.
It is the best built seaport I ever saw.
The Streets run in general at right angles&amp; the Houses uniform, though from the Collieries&amp; Smoke they are rather black.
It was built not above 100 years ago.
It lies in a Bottom between two hills, which shelter it from the North&amp; South,&amp; I think there is another which protects it from the East.
From the West Wind the Ships are sheltered by six long Piers which stretching in different directions break the force of the Waves.
Against them the Ships are moored.
On them they lade&amp; unlade their goods&amp; there are holes through some of them, like small Arches of a Bridge, by which Boats go from one of the six little Harbors to another without going round the Pier.
The Ships all entirely dry at low Water.
A few large Cannon are on a Battery on the South West of the Town near the Sea Side&amp; a few more, with Turf Embrasures lately made, at a place dignified by the name of Garrison, a force seemingly inadequate to the defence of the place.
The Trade is chiefly confined to Ireland&amp; the Isle of Man( which is distinctly visible from the Seashore).
Coals are the Chief Article of Exportation.
They had formerly a great trade to Virginia&amp; Maryland but since that is stopped the Vessels are chiefly gone into the Transport Service&amp; you see few large stones in the Harbor.
The Isle of Man is a bold hilly Object with an invisible neck of Land that connects it with another mountainous Shore, the Calf of Man.
St.
Bees Head a fine black Rock to the South which serves the Sailors as a land mark.
The Scotch Hills and Shore rounding at the End of Cumberland make an immense Bay that has a grand Appearance.
But the great Support of Whitehaven is its Coal Mines, chiefly the property of Sir James Lowther, who it is imagined gets an annual clear income of £ 18,00 from them.
They are some of them close to the Town, other near two miles off.
Mr. Lutwidge not being at home when I called I could get but little intelligence respecting them( or the Trade).
They are very strict about shewing them&amp; the Overseer, Mr. Spedding, told me at the Inn, denied Ld.
Wensley&amp; Mr. Granville the Week before I was there.
The Coal is not found in Veins but in a kind of stratum or layer extending far and wide.
They leave pillars of coal to support the incumbent Earth,&amp; when they can find little they thin these,&amp; when they quit the Mine almost entirely take them away, which is called robbing the mine.
( A great number of fathoms of sold Rock, supposed so firm as not to be in any danger of falling in, did, so necessary are these Pillars.
I think it was near Newcastle.)
The Works under Ground are very extensive&amp; are carried a great Way under the Sea.
Their Caution about shewing them is perhaps occasioned by their fears of their being set on fire.
They in general find the Coal by boring to a great depth, perpendicularly.
Sometimes it rises from below on an inclined Plane, so that you can go in with Ease.
The Place where it opens in this Way is called the Beer or Bear Mouth.
The Shafts are very long&amp; the miners who are let down in Buckets are in danger for the smallest Stone falling on their Heads might do them a material Injury falling from such a Height.
The Common Mark of Coal beneath is a dirty, blackish, crumbling Soil on a freestone, or some kind of stone.
They are greatly subject to Damps in these Mines, especially the fire damp, so that in some of them the Lights they receive is from a Wheel full of flints turning against a Steel, as flame not sparks sets the damp on fire.
The most dangerous&amp; unwholesome time of visiting them, a Physician told me, was in Autumn or latter end of Summer.
There is a Steam Engine.
They meet sometimes with a strong demonstration of some deluge or internal convulsion of the Earth-- Coal, Stone, Earth&amp; all kinds of Soil strangely jumbled&amp; thrown together all at once in a bed of Coal, which upon removing that is found as before.
The Coal is raised out of the Mines by a Horse&amp; put into Waggons which hold I forget the exact Quantity but I am sure ½ a ton.
These have Wheels of cast Metal,&amp; there are Roads made on purpose for them on the South Hill where it overlooks the Town, which have an inclination from the Mine to the Town,&amp; have a piece of Wood on each side( sometimes two abreast) that exactly fits the Wheels so that the Carriages can in most places be pushed by men.
These Roads terminate in a large Warehouse from which there are six Great Funnels which go at the Bottom into the Holds of the Ships&amp; the Bottom of the Cart lets the Coals into it at the Top.
The funnels are called Hurries.
They have a contrivance to prevent the Waggons going too quick, a piece of iron, I think, pressing upon the Wheels.
Lest there should not be ships ready to receive the Coal, there is another Floor, beneath, of the same Warehouse, in which it is dropped in the same manner as in the Hurries&amp; in which it lays till there be a demand for it.
There is a contrivance for the Waggon to go from one Part of the Warehouse to another: at the Place where the different Road meet there is a Part of the floor large enough to receive the Waggon which turns upon a Pivot&amp; 2 men can with Ease( sometimes one does it) run that round til it comes in a line with the Way they mean to go.
There are many of them as there is by means of them a communication through all that floor of the Warehouse to the 6 different Hurries.
The Road in the Warehouse is fitted with Wood in the same manner except that it is shod with Iron.
One Horse draws the Waggons back to the mouth of the mine,&amp; sometimes from it where there is a difficult place.
The Wheels of the Waggons are made like a Groove, but are as if one side of the Groove was taken away, that on the outside of the Wheel.
Sir James Lowther's Place at the flats has cost him an immense sum of money&amp; there are many entertaining stories relative to it which are told in the neighborhood.
Returned to Cockermouth at night.
Friday September 17th After raining all the night before it still continued to rain&amp; was a dreadful day.
Played a game at Billiards in the morning, Cookson dined out, supped with me&amp; Mr. Lothian.
Confined to the House all day by the Rain.
Walked out to the Castle which looks very well from the Bridge.
It is entirely in Ruins&amp; has been a strong one; it is surrounded on one side by the Cocker&amp; on the other by the Derwent, which join almost under its Walls.
There is a kind of Vault below where is an immense weight of Building all resting upon a single Arch.
Skiddaw&amp; all the Mountains veiled in Clouds.
A pretty Village to the North a mile off, seen through an old Window.
Saturday September 18th Thought of setting out in the Morning, when there came on a most violent storm of Wind&amp; Rain with thunder&amp; lightning.
( A man was once shot dead from the Castle at a place which must be near ¾ of a mile off.)
Cookson&amp; I in the afternoon took a Ride as far as the end of Crummock Water&amp; walked up( according to West's direction) above a Mr. Bertie's Woods.
The View is of a very fine valley watered by the Cocker which appeared to great advantage from having overflowed its Banks&amp; made new swells&amp; bends.
West's description of the View is very exact&amp; good.
Grasmire frowns awfully behind on the Left and Mellbreak on the Right.
A pretty View of that side of Crummock&amp; the valley between it&amp; Loweswater, part of which is visible.
While we were out were 2 Violent Storms of Rain&amp; Hail but we luckily took Shelter in Scale Inn.
We had not time to go to the House West speaks of by the Gate leading to Ennerdale.
It was dark before we reached Cockermouth&amp; the wind cold and uncomfortable.
The Ride about 15 miles.
Sunday September 19th The morning as usual rainy&amp; cold.
Towards 12 o' Clock it brightened up&amp; weary of being so long confined to an Inn I set off about 2 to go by Ennerdale to Holm Rook.
I took a Guide with me to Ennerdale Bridge.
It rained soon after I set out until I got there.
The country for some miles near Cockermouth very bad, an extended moor with high mountains at some distance to close the Scene.
About six miles off there are some marks of cultivation all the way to Ennerdale Bridge, but the country poor.
You pass a small tarn, Ullock Tarn, in which are many Trout,&amp; leave Mockerkin on a Hill on the left.
Went from the Public House at Ennerdale Bridge to How Hill, 1 mile&amp; ½, to have a View of the Water.
It is surrounded 3 ways by high Mountains, its sides are some of them interspersed with self-planted Wood.
You see a great Mountain before you called Pillar.
How Hall the country people said was a very old Place, in the time of the Romans they thought,&amp; many Images etc.
had been found in it.
As one stands on the Hill in the shape of the Lake is not much unlike that of England.
It is said to be 4 miles long&amp; 1 over-- I should not think it so much.
A Rock or two on the North West come close to the Water Edge,&amp; there is a little Rocky something, an Island, peeping out of the Water.
There are Char in it, which about Michelmas come onto the River which runs out of the Lake,&amp; lie in Shoals upon the Sand or Gravel.
They are never caught in the Summer except one by Chance.
I saw the Lake,' tis true, to a disadvantage but in my Opinion it is not worth going far out of one's way to see.
The Whitehaven people( it is 7 or 8 miles off) often come to fish there.
The Vale is a large one&amp; is said to be very healthy; my Guide pointed me out a House where lived a Man aged 100.
They had several in the Parish nearly of like age, and said that his ancestors for some generations had not died younger.
From Ennerdale Bridge to Calder Bridge 6 miles over a Hill called Cold Fell.
One has from it a fine View of the Sea&amp; the Isle of Man.
I saw something in my Glass, I fancy it must have been the Hills on the far side of the Isle of Man, which I took at first for Ireland.
There was a most Heavenly Sun setting, something of the same kind with what I saw in my descent from Skiddaw, except that below the dark blue Clouds a piece of red sky came in&amp; reddened the Sea at the End of the Horizon&amp; went in one Part as they paint Rain.
I stayed long looking at it&amp; did not reach Calder Bridge till after Sunset, where hearing Mr. Lutwidge was not at Home I took up my quarters all Night&amp; had a tolerable Bed.
Monday September 20th Walked in the morning to see the Ruins of Calder Abbey.
There is nothing very striking in them.
The Building seems to have been a large one from the four large arches which seem to have been the Middle or entrance to three side behind each of which there must have been as much as there is now behind one of them.
That which remains is in general low but venerable from being covered with Ivy.
Between it and the River stands a white House, Mr. Senhouse, opposite to which on a steep hill on the other side of the River is a great Quantity of Wood.
It would mend the View much if the Abbey were amongst the Trees on the other side, or the Hill not so steep&amp; the House upon its declivity, the Trees on it being removed toward where the Abbey stands at present.
Went by Santon Bridge over the Irt which come out of Wast Water&amp; falls into the sea at Ravenglass.
Into Wastdale.
You have on the Way a good view of the Sea&amp; Isle of Man&amp; the Elbowed Harbor of Ravenglass which was once a great Place but now though it has a market consists of very few Houses.
Before you reach Santon Bridge you see a high Hill with a kind of crack in it.
This is Sca Fell said by the People thereabouts to be higher than Skiddaw.
As you enter Wastdale the Appearance is very striking.
You are in a great Valley almost completely skirted and ringed by Rocks of an immense Height&amp; at the End you see one in the Styehead like the sharpest part of a Wedge which closes the whole.
It seems as if it were designed to be floated by some immense Lake.
Wastwater is far too inconsiderable for the Purpose.
You presently come to it after passing by two or three small Houses.
It is a narrow Lake without any Wood or Cultivation at its Banks except a little at its outlet on the West End.
An immense Rock Scree runs by the south side of it the whole Length, whose sides where they are not directly perpendicular are covered with Shivers amongst which one sees vast fragments of Rock that have tumbled from the Top.
The place has a most savage Appearance.
On the left a little behind is a Rock steep as a Wall&amp; the Inclosures of this Extraordinary Vale are all Rocks not Hills.
Wastwater is 4 miles long&amp; I should hardly guess ½ a one broad, though they tell you' tis one.
You ride by the side of its whole length when the dale narrows and there fronts you a curious Rock just the Shape of the Brink of Strombolo or Mount Vesuvius.
You may almost stride over the Top of it though high.
On the Right is Sca Fell.
Saw two country men driving sheep, observing their Shoes more clumsy than the clumsy ones of the Country I askeed their Weight&amp; he told me betwixt 7&amp; 8 but that he has a pair at Home which weighed 9 pounds.
Take a Guide at Wastdale Head to lead you into Borrodale.
All the scenery is the most barren&amp; desolate imaginable.
There runs a Brook which divides Great End&amp; Gavel, the outposts of Borrodale, the first on the Right the other on the left.
The Road here becomes dreadfully bad&amp; that it may get up the Hill winds in a most extraordinary manner.
This goes on to the End.
But the better way of going is letting your Horses be led&amp; walking in the foot Path over the Gavel.
You have from it a View of the Sea as if from between two Walls&amp; of the Valley of Wastdale.
The Mountain itself looks dreadful as it stands bristling up in spiked columns above the Shivers&amp; Ruins which it has made.
It is reckoned dangerous passing over in a frost, as the Rock then cracks&amp; rolls violently in huge fragments.
From the Ascent you have a clear View of the Windings of the other Road.
When you get close to the Top there is a small Valley in which there is a Lake perhaps ¾ of a Mile round called Styehead Tarn.
There are many Trout in it, but in far more in another on the other side of the Great End, called Sprinkling-- in the maps Sparkling-- Tarn.
You have then a View of Helvellyn, something similar to that of Skiddaw from Castle Hill, or of the Sea from the Ascent except that it looks far higher than you.
You see on the left a Hill with some little grass upon it which Peculiarity is reckoned a sufficient distinction from the other Hills of the Place&amp; it is accordingly called Green Gavel.
You soon begin to descend into Borrodale,&amp; its green field&amp; Inclosures give a most agreeable Relief to the Eye after the Barrenness&amp; Rudeness which have hitherto engrossed it.
As you go down Glaramara is on the Right next to End, not where the Guide informs you,&amp; the Wadd Hill on your Left at some distance.
My Guide was a very civil obliging man.
His name John Braithwaite or Thomas Braithwaite of Wastdale Head.
I conjectured that the water could not descend from so great a Height into Borrodale without some Waterfall.
My Guide accordingly conducted me to a very fine one,&amp; with much difficulty I got close to it.
It is( as you go up Borrodale from Keswick) about ¾ of a mile from Seathwaite, on the Right at the End of the dale.
The Water falls perpendicularly over a black marble a considerable Height, I should think 20 yards or more( they say many more).
On the left are Trees rudely disposed among the naked Rock which 50 or 100 or 200 yds.
from the fall rises gradually to the Place whence the Water falls.
On the Right at some distance is Force Crag, one of the same kind but I thought at the time finer than Falcon Crag, more shining,&amp; rising gradually as the other.
I frequently asked the Names of the Mountains about Wastdale&amp; the Stye Head, some of which I set down.
I find a list of barbarous Names-- Yewbarrow, Hind Crag, Heederland Fell, Gavel, End, Green Gavel, Seat, Kirk Fell, Taylor Gill( a Taylor was once demolished there) etc., etc.
The name of the Waterfall is I think Green How( Hill) Force.
A fine Waterfall just above Seathwaite to the left going to Keswick.
It was a delightful Evening&amp; I saw innumerable new Beauties in Borrodale.
When the Sky has that clearness which it has in a Summer or rather Autumnal Evening the Mountains appear to stand off in a particular Manner( perhaps the Contrast of the whitish Blue) which I cannot adequately describe, but the Effect of which every one must have perceived.
I can compare it to the standing off of the Clouds when viewed in the convex Mirror.
There is no dazzle, all is distinctness&amp; the Outline clearly defined.
Castle Hill had that Appearance,&amp; I never saw anything more beautiful than it looked flanked by those two immense Rocks, that on the South East a particularly fine one, from a kind of great Pillow or pasty of Rock from a Line betwixt it&amp; Skiddaw a little way from it.
From this Pasty the River too was visible.
As you proceed new Wonders strike you&amp; I made&amp; penciled down several observations of Beauties that I had not before remarked, but unfortunately the Pencil mark wore out in my Pocket&amp; disappeared.
Before you reach Lowdore, you come into a Bay of Rocks, that are very fine, near which are some like the Matlock Rocks, white&amp; with Trees.
Castle Rock stands boldly forward jutting his Head that looks at the same Time venerable&amp; amiable.
It is black from underwood&amp; its head set upon another Hill, a pair of shoulders,' tis like a Dog on his Backside.
I had often heard of the Effect of the Moonshine&amp; the Waterfalls at night&amp; the Lake,&amp; I accordingly sent word from Castle Rock to dispatch Hutton to me.
I in the meantime went in a small Boat upon the Lake.
The Moon shone very bright but did not look near so fine as at Sea.
The waterfalls sounded dreadfull.
It grew dark, windy&amp; they missing me, I was very near spending the Night upon the Lake.
I found little Cookson at the Inn&amp; fell asleep in my Chair as soon as Supper was over in spite of all my Endeavors, so went off to Bed.
The Road I came that day a most extraordinary one, Wildness&amp; desolation the more prevailing features.
The Lake at the Top has neither wood nor cultivated fields nor Houses about it.
Cockermouth is a pretty large place, though not I suppose above 1/ 3 of the size of Whitehaven, consisting chiefly of one very large wide street.
The Inhabitants are reckoned to be about 3000 or perhaps ore, the Shalloons are the only articles of manufactory; the Place was much more populous( 5000) before the commencement of the American Disputes, when there were a prodigious Quantity of Hats exported.
It is not, I am told, a very healthy Place.
The Borough is absolutely Sir James Lowther's.
There are about 200 Voters-- Burgage Tenures which he has secure to him.
Tuesday September 21st An unpleasant morning&amp; my horse lame.
Walked out to Cockshut Hill in the middle of the day.
I cannot say that this View of the Lake pleases me so well as many others.
One of the prettiest Objects( beside Wallow Crag&amp; those seen from all parts of the Lake) is a delightful green Peninsula with a House&amp; Trees on it which forms a sweet Bay on the other side under Walla Crag opposite the Lord's Island.
The Views of Keswick&amp; Skiddaw are very good between Cockshut Hill&amp; the Town.
Crow Park is not at all a favorite Station with me.
The Weather soon grew bad&amp; prognosticated a coming Storm from which I fled home&amp; by which I was prevented all night from visiting Mr. Farrington.
Wednesday September 22nd The Day promised for some time to be no better than the preceding ones, but I ventured forth&amp; it grew tolerably good.
Passed Cut Gill&amp; Barrow Gill&amp; reached Lowdore in a very decent fall.
It is in an awful Chasm formed between two immense Rocks, that on the Right black&amp; white yet shining with Rain with Trees here&amp; there fantastically disposed, that on the left higher than the other, naked&amp; rounded at the Top like a small rounded Tower, white.
The Water Course looks as if it were interrupted by the Ruins of some magnificent Castle which it had overwhelmed.
Rocks of an immense size in the Passage-- near the Top ½ a black Pillar&amp; another not so regular above it.
Island ½ way up-- the Fall close to it.
The Water, obstructed by the Rocks, round which it curls, falls thundering into 2 immense Gulfs just below me.
On my left 2 pieces of Rock of a vast size with two Trees on each; they have been tumbled down by the Water.
Never was I witness to such a Scene.
As I went down, saw a hole worn through the Rock through which the Water pours black&amp; irresistible.
Skiddaw's Top shrouded in Clouds&amp; out of them down one of his seams rushed an immense Torrent of Water quite to the Bottom of the Mountain, on which the Sun shone.
The Rocks looked wonderfully fine to-day&amp; Lowdore at a distance particularly grand, the Water plainly alive 2 miles off, of a creamy brown, the Rocks purple, very deep&amp; in a recess.
Went up Borrodale through Rosthwaite to Sealtor on the way up to the Wadd mine which is on the Left when you are nearly at the Top of it.
A Gush of Water the whole Way.
It is very pretty looking back from the Ascent on the fertile fields of Borro dale.
The Descent into Garharth dale is very grand.
Sublime mighty Rocks inclose the Place, that on the Right Yew Crag, that on the Left( by much the finest) Honister Crag.
The Latter looks as if Waves of Rock had been violently agitated&amp; had not yet utterly subsided.
From the Top is said to be a good Prospect; when I was in the Valley the Clouds were upon it.
In Yew Crag(&amp; some in Honister rented by the same people) vast quantities of Slate are got which is said to be of a very good Quality.
The Road on the Garharth Side very bad but not equal to the Stye.
The Sledge Men come down the steepest place with Slate( at least 40 stone in a Sledge) without prods to their Shoes, as indeed a Man told me none of them had at any time.
The Noise of the Men getting Slate is said to sound like thunder.
They were not at Work when I went by.
From a Gate beyond the Houses at Garharth( In the Descent you see Buttermere, the country man's Garharth Water) is a very curious View of wild Rocks&amp; Hills: looking back at the Edge of Honister Green juts out&amp; looks like the Cone in a Crater formed by Hay Stacks on the Right and Yew Crag on the Left, or like an Acorn in its Cup.
Hay Rick&amp; those Rocks more black&amp; rugged than any I have seen though not so high as some, jagged&amp; broken at the Points.
The 4 Mountains that skirt the opposite side of the Lake rise immediately from it, black, conical&amp; immensely high&amp; wilder than any others I have seen.
Steel Pike, High Crag, Red Pike&amp; c. Down their Sides are some wonderfully fine Waterfalls which rush at once into the Lake.
Between the Hay Ricks&amp; Steel Pikes in a Chasm in the Rock an Eagle's Nest, a remarkably fine one taken out of it this year.
This Lake about 2 miles long, very little Wood near it,&amp; no Char in it.
On the East Side close to the Water Edge some huge Hills of Rock which may perhaps have been precipitated from those on the other Side of the Road.
Went to a small House, got some Honey&amp; Bread&amp; Butter&amp; the afternoon being bad hastened home to Keswick.
Took a Guide a very little way who would not take anything.
Bleaberry Tarn is in the Rock or Mountain like a Crater at the North end of Garharth Water.
The Mountains as one looks back at them in the Way to Keswick look dreadfully black but you soon lose sight of them&amp; wind up the Side of the Hills that divide Buttermere from Newlands Hawse.
On the Left are some Mountains like Quarter Globes green to the Top&amp; Sheep feeding up to the Top.
They look beautiful after the Barrenness of Garharth, but as you see the End of one that is withdrawn from View as black or red and grim as Grasmire.
When you enter Newlands the change is wonderful.
You see the Mountains on the Right as far as they be discoverable black as Night&amp; grim as possible with many Waterfalls down them.
In all the little Tarns in the very Bosoms of the Rocks are Great Quantities of Fish chiefly Trout.
You go on till you come into a more cultivated country.
Maiden's Bower dark&amp; dreadful shews its back to the Right, its front is near Grange.
In a low red Hill nearest you on the Right before you leave the Inclosures, Goldscop, were formerly Copper Mines but they have not been worked for some time.
About a Mile before you reach Swinside is a good view of Bassenthwaite.
Got home&amp; went to Farrington's.
The Ride of the Day about 21 or 22 miles.
Thursday September 23rd The day unpromising.
Went to my Guide at Rosthwaite, who gave me an Account of the Wadd mine.
He had often seen the Eagle's nest taken.
He was a shepherd.
The sheep will stay about the ground&amp; Hills to which they have been used,&amp; they go to fold them once or twice a week.
It was very misty&amp; uncomfortable.
Went to the Left through Stonethwaite&amp; Rosthwaite Chapel where was the Schoolmaster teaching school, who has altogether an Income of £ 40 a year, a Rich Man.
When I got into the Valley the Rocks inclosed.
They looked most tremendous, Eagle Crag( jutting forward like Castle Hill very immensely high&amp; black as Night), Sergeant Crag&amp; Bull Crag which( as the Guide Hutton tells you) if they be seen at all from the Part of Borrodale where strangers are generally carried it is but the Edge of each one of them which is discoverable.
When you are at this end of Borrodale, Bowfell denies all passage,&amp; the Stake( on that Side green) is a low Hill like a Step between the posts of a Stile between far higher ones; which over, there is a passage on to Langdale.
Bowfell is very high&amp; over it from the Langdale side there is a way leading to Wastdale.
The Stake is on the Left&amp; the Road winds up to it in the manner West describes.
The Road is however not so bad on the Borrodale Side as many I have gone over, nor on the other so bad as the Stye for a Horse.
In ascending one Place where the Earth moulders away by the side of a small Chasm&amp; is so narrow that in leading your Horse great care is requisite to prevent his tumbling in, thre is some little Danger.
When you get to the top of the Stake you see one of the Tops of Langdale Pikes, Pike a Stickle,&amp; soon come in sight of Bowfell which when I saw it partly discoverable&amp; partly shrowded looked black as ten Furies, terrible as Hell.
On the Top is a small Valley covered with Ling where are great Quantities of Moor Game.
People frequently come from about Kendal to shoot here.
The descent into Langdale is very bad&amp; the Road( not winding so much) is dreadfully stony, nor does it answer at all till one is at the Bottom when after proceeding a little way&amp; looking back there is a most tremendous semicircle of Rocks: Pike a Stickle&amp; Harrison's Pike on the Right&amp; Bowfell in Front&amp; a little to the Right.
The foot of the Stake is about 8 miles from Ambleside or rather more.
Pleasurable coming once more into a Valley that bore the marks of Habitation.
The Valley is a very poor one, the Soil bad&amp; meagre.
Borrodale they account better from having the Wadd mine in it.
This day was a very bad one.
Went by Langdale Chapel&amp; was agreeably surprized by a beautiful&amp; true Westmoreland Lake, Elterwater, which though small looked delightful from the Quantity of Charcoal Wood on the Hill to the Right&amp; the Richness of the surrounding Scenery.
Went by the Side of it&amp; by Loughrigg Tarn, a diminutive Lake no way remarkable.
Had a View of Windermere about 3 miles from Ambleside to which Place I went through Clapersgate.
Friday September 24th Before Breakfast went to view the Waterfall above Ambleside.
In the Morning staid at home&amp; wrote; bad, very dark.
In the afternoon went as far as the Bridge at the foot of Rydale Water, went into the inclosure&amp; turned immediately to the right into a narrow lane( through a Gate) till I reached some Houses where I with some difficulty got a Boy to accompany me.
( Some of the Kendal People give out Wool to be spun here.)
Returned back a few yards&amp; turned to the Right up a Way which leads to Grasmere on the opposite side of the Lake to the Keswick Road.
Soon came in sight of Ridale Water which from this side looks exceedingly well with Sir Michael Fleming's white House amongst the Trees&amp; an immense Mountain towering immediately above it.
It looked not like the Place of a young man of Fashion.
Proceeded to where the Road joins that from Clapersgate,&amp; turned to the Right.
( The Ridale Road goes by the Side of Loughrigg, a great Hill, the whole way.)
Went down the Lane by the Side of Grasmere water till I cam to a white Gate on the Right leading to a decent House which a green field between it&amp; the Lake nearly opposite the Island.
It has a Boat House too.
From this field is a beautiful View of the Lake.
Went upon the Island from which the Place did not appear to Advantage&amp; landed a little way down.
Went to Grasmere&amp; met my Horses( could have rode the whole way but 10 or 12 yards).
Went up Butterlip How, but it was well nigh dark&amp; I did not admire the View so much as I expected.
A curious Waterfall in the Rock to the Left behind it.
From the Side of Loughrigg you see at a great distance Saddle Back through an opening betwixt Seatandle&amp; a Mountain opposite to it.
Seatandle must be part of Faiorfield.
It was so dark that I lost the Beauties of the Lake in my way Home.
Saturday September 25th The morning very bad indeed till about one o' Clock when G. Bond and I sallied out together to ascend Loughrigg.
We first went to Sir Michael F .s Park for the Cascade in the Park.
It is well worth seeing&amp; there is an excellent Road made to it.
There is in it more Water than in the generality of these Falls.
It consists of two falls&amp; between them the Water curls through the Rock which forms its Channel.
Went&amp; saw the Cascade in the Orchard which is most excellently described by Mason.
It is best seen by stooping a little before you reach the Window when the Water appears fleecing before it passes under the Bridge.
Returned&amp; went by the side of Ridale Water for some time the same Way as the day before.
Ascended Loughrigg in the Rain&amp; walked all over it in Expectation of its clearing.
However we waited in Vain&amp; walked at last Home wet to the Skin after having been out 5 hours or more.
It cleared up a little as we went Home&amp; we saw Windermere from above Clapersgate but not to Advantage for we were too high.
